7
The Formation of Avoidant Attachment
(Grid 2)
We are unaware that there is anything of which we needed to be unaware,
and then unaware that we needed to be unaware of needing to be unaware.
—(R. D. LAING, 1969, QUOTED IN BROMBERG, 2011, P. 31)
Avoidance & the Deactivating Strategy
Our attachment systems do not develop in a vacuum. Patterns
develop in the light and shadow of experiences with our caregivers,
in how they respond or don’t respond to us, so much of which traces
back to the caregiver’s experiences with their own caregivers.
Therefore, as we begin this chapter about working with patients who
demonstrate characteristics of avoidant attachment, it is essential to
hold that avoidance is an adaptation to the rejection and negatively
toned behaviors of these patients’ attachment figures. The avoidant
pattern reflects a deactivating strategy—that is, a strategy that
deactivates the attachment system and minimizes attachment needs
and feelings to avoid rejection, intrusiveness, and humiliation so as
to preserve the self. These patients developed this secondary
strategy to maintain safety when their caregivers’ own insecurity
limited their capacity to respond in an attuned way. They have
deactivated their relating, choosing to seemingly eschew it. We say
“seemingly” because in fact the deactivation of relating is a strategy
that allows attachment and connection, as these folks can best
manage it as they seek to avoid the emotional pain associated with
true relating.

In the face of dismissive caregivers who fail to provide
contingently responsive care during times of need, avoidance is
adaptive. Caregivers who dismiss their own and their children’s
attachment needs in turn seek to preserve their own states of mind,
keeping the status quo with respect to their own histories (Main et
al., 1985). When a child develops in relationship with a caregiver
whose state of mind is dismissive, that child learns to turn off their
attachment needs with deactivating strategies, denying their own
needs and attachment yearnings to avoid their emotional pain in
response to the caregiver’s reaction or nonreaction. Over time, these
needs and the emotions associated with them fade from awareness,
and the avoidant pattern takes hold. Over time, this pattern also
describes what they are able to recognize when they themselves
become parents. Turning off their own attachment needs and related
emotions diminishes their capacity to identify and attune to the
attachment needs and emotions of their own children.
And so the cycle perpetuates. Attachment strategies are passed
down intergenerationally, through caregivers who themselves were
once children, developing in response to their experiences with their
attachment figures. Therefore, it is crucial for psychotherapists to
keep in mind that our dyadic experiences with our patients are
influenced by each of their histories, and also our histories, and the
relationship that is co-created, and co-created anew each session, in
each moment. Patient and therapist—we each have our own
attachment systems to be activated and utilized. How we make use
of ourselves is as important to successful psychotherapy as the skills
and interventions that we offer.
In the next section, we return to the original infant–caregiver
interaction studies to peer into the exchanges between mothers and
their children who develop avoidant patterning in order to
understand what lies beneath the surface. We name pertinent
characteristics of the dismissive state of mind from the AAI (Main et
al., 1985) and identify markers of speech and behavioral patterns
that are likely to appear in our patients’ discourse in therapy
sessions. These observations provide a way for us to picture what
may have happened with the young children who have grown into

the adults who show up in our offices who rely on relating through
not relating (i.e., the adults who show up in our offices who rely on
avoidant strategies instead of genuine relational connection).
Early Observations
When Mary Ainsworth was studying the growth of attachment in
Uganda, she was struck by how each of the mother–infant
relationships was different. As she studied and logged the
interactions of mothers and their babies, a few remarkable
characteristics stood out, upon which she based her preliminary
conjectures, which she continued to refine with the Baltimore home
observations. In keeping with her deep valuing of naturalistic
observation, she studied mother–infant interactions in the first year
of life in the familiar setting of their home, and later developed the
SSP for the lab to correlate the results. Ainsworth noted that the
mothers who had secure babies were sensitive and responsive, and
physically and psychologically available; they also knew their babies
really well. She noticed that these mothers were more responsive to
her inquiries about their daily routines with their children and could
speak with sensitive perceptions about their infants’ behavior and
preferences. She called these mothers “excellent informants.”
In Uganda, Ainsworth had categorized a few of the children as
non- or not-yet attached. They were younger and displayed none of
the typical attachment behaviors toward their mothers, like crying
when she left the room, nor following her when they began to crawl.
Nor did they greet her with animation when she returned. Most
notable was the lack of discriminatory behavior toward their
mothers. One of the children in the study, Kulistina, was described
as
friendly towards everyone. Wherever she sat she smiled
cheerfully at the person holding her and at others in the
room; she did not appear to smile more fully, more readily or
more frequently at her mother than at anyone else. Kulistina’s

indiscriminate friendliness displays what in later attachment
research became known as over bright—marked by an
absence of fear and related attachment system activation. (R.
Marvin, personal communication, September, 15, 2023)
Ainsworth (1967) writes,
Kulistina had become so accustomed to being left alone in her
crib that she did not cry when put down and left, nor did she
cry to be picked up. . . . Her mother felt too busy to hold her
after feedings except in the afternoon after she finished her
work. When the baby cried her mother did not pick her up
unless the crying continued persistently. Kulistina was rarely
taken anywhere and indeed she was rarely carried. (pp. 163–
164)
The mothers of the “non- or not-yet attached” children in the
Uganda study were noted to give less time, care, and attention to
their babies than the mothers in the other two groups. They were
more difficult to engage in conversations about their children. They
preferred to talk of other things or were hard to settle into
conversation as they “hopped about.” Some of their descriptions of
their children’s behaviors did not match what Ainsworth and her
fellow researcher observed.
At first, Ainsworth considered that age and development were to
explain for the designation of not-yet attached, even though by
observation, their mothers were less involved. However, when she
studied mother–infant interactions in the Baltimore homes and
followed up with more deliberate studies of separation and reunion
behaviors between mothers and infants in the Strange Situation,
Ainsworth began to recognize that children with such behaviors were
displaying purposeful strategies of avoidance. In other words, they
were defending against their attachment needs.

Baltimore Home Visits Correlated to the Strange Situation
In the Baltimore home observations, the children classified as
avoidant cried more than the secure children, but not less than the
ambivalent/resistant children. Both showed more separation distress
than the secure children at home. In the Strange Situation, during
the separation episodes, while the avoidant children did search for
their mothers, they didn’t cry, and they avoided their mothers during
the reunion episodes. In contrast, the ambivalent/resistant children
showed an intensification of distress during separations, and high
activation of attachment behavior during reunions (Ainsworth et al.,
1978). Two elements became clear. The behavior of avoidant babies
was serving a defensive function (Ainsworth & Bell, 1972; Robertson
& Bowlby, 1952), and because of the cross-referencing that was
happening between the home studies and the SSP, what became
increasingly apparent was that the mothers of avoidant babies were
more rejecting than mothers in either of the other two groups
(Ainsworth et al., 1971). Ainsworth acknowledges that deeper
understanding of these initial results was furthered by Main and her
students’ additional analysis of data from the first sample of the
longitudinal home observations (Ainsworth et al., 1978/2015, p.
134).
The infants’ avoidance of the mothers during the Strange
Situation directly linked to the mothers’ rejection of the infants’
expression of attachment behavior at home. During the home
observations, the children were seen to follow their mothers from
room to room, which is attachment behavior. Yet, when they were
picked up, their mothers frequently put them down before the
babies gave a signal of readiness to be put down, exemplifying the
mothers’ lack of sensitivity or accessibility to what the babies
actually needed. Or the mothers simply ignored the babies’ gestures
to be picked up or held longer. Ainsworth noted that some mothers
rejected their infants’ desire for bodily contact and some of the
mothers admitted to disliking or feeling averse to physical contact.
Over time, between the home observations of the first quarter and
the fourth quarter, these babies were stiffer in their mothers’ arms

and less likely to mold to her body. Although their attachment
systems were activated, they tended not to be terminated (i.e.,
despite the fact that the babies cried and followed them, the
mothers did not respond contingently), nor did they meet, satisfy, or
address the signaling behavior of their babies’ attachment systems.
Rarely did these infants have the experience of being cuddled and
soothed to the point of satisfaction, so that their attachment system
would reach a state of quiescence (Ainsworth et al., 1978/2015).
At home, the mothers of the avoidant babies appeared to be
“more angry with and irritated by” their babies, although they
attempted to suppress it. However, the presence of angry feelings
was visible to the careful observer on the videotape records; the
mothers’ facial expressions seemed to lack mobility—more evidence
of the suppression of their feelings. Another trait of the mothers of
avoidant children is one of rigidity and compulsiveness. When the
babies’ demands interrupt the mothers’ activities or the baby is not
instantly cooperative with the mother, this is likely to bring irritation,
rough handling, or other unpleasant experiences to her baby
(Ainsworth et al., 1978/2015, p. 309). As well as crying more than
the babies rated as secure, these babies expressed more anger at
home toward their mothers than other babies. According to Bowlby
(1973), anger is directly related to the thwarting of attachment
behavior.
All of these factors lead to and stem from the pervasive
discomfort prevalent in these dyads. In the Strange Situation, when
the child classified as avoidant is introduced to the laboratory
playroom, the child begins to explore and play, but shows no signs
of affective response to the toys, nor distress at the mother’s leave-
taking. When she returns, the child does not orient to their mother
nor greet her. They may stiffen when picked up by her; their
expression remains affectless, and they may pull away and reach
toward a toy on the floor. Main (1995) concludes that “attachment
behavior is replaced by active avoidance . . . looking away, moving
away, turning away, and leaning out of arms as well as persistent
attention to the inanimate environment” (pp. 417–418).

Due to the unfamiliar setting and stress of the Strange Situation
procedure, the stakes are higher, which increased the children’s use
of protective strategies and defensive exclusion. At home, the babies
identified as avoidant were more demonstrative of their distress.
One might imagine that under the increased stress of the Strange
Situation, the defenses would break down and the babies would
signal their needs more strongly, which did occur with the
ambivalent babies. However, as the case here shows, when a child is
more concerned about the potential for getting hurt, and has
repeatedly experienced their needs being rejected, they are more
defensive. This is an important factor for psychotherapists to
consider, as we set about establishing connection with our patients
who show signs of avoidant attachment. How significant it is for us
to become astutely aware of the signals of these patients’
attachment needs and affective responses so that we can be attuned
to them.
Mary Main (1995) determined that avoidant behavior shows
inflexible attention. Specifically, she describes how it operates as an
organized adaptive strategy:
The continual exploration of avoidant infants in the Strange
Situation has been interpreted as an organized shift of
attention or “diversionary activity” that enables the infant to
minimize responsiveness to fear-eliciting conditions and thus
maintain the “deactivation” or repression of attachment
behavior. (p. 418; see also Bowlby, 1980; Main, 1981)
Jude Cassidy (2001) writes,
Bowlby proposed that the sight of the mother might activate
the attachment system—which ordinarily leads the infant to
engage in bids for contact and comfort—but [emphasis
added] because the past expression of such bids has been
met with painful rejection, the baby has learned to turn

defensively toward play activity. (p. 125; see also Bowlby
1980; Ainsworth et al., 1978; Main 1981)
Cassidy (2001) goes on to discuss how the physiological studies
(Spangler & Grossmann, 1993) indicate that this play does not show
signs of genuine play, animated by zest and a manifestation of
creativity:
Whereas the heart rate of babies truly interested in play
typically decreases, the heart rate of these babies does not
decrease, suggesting a lack of true focus on the play. Thus, it
seems that these infants are not shifting attention to the toys,
but rather away from [emphasis added] the mother. (p. 125;
see also Spangler & Grossmann, 1993)
Furthermore, when a child seeking the proximity of their attachment
figure is rejected and thus when their bids for care are turned down,
they lose trust in their own selves as deserving. In free-play settings,
Grossmann and Grossmann (1991) observed that mothers of
avoidant infants withdraw from the infant especially when the infant
seemed sad (Main, 1995, p. 418). For the children to show their
feelings, they run the risk of being rejected, told verbally and/or
nonverbally that their emotions are uncalled for or misplaced, or to
“stop being a baby.” Or they may simply be ignored, although there
is nothing simple about being ignored. Not being seen is an injury
that pierces to the very heart of existence, or perhaps, more
accurately, to the very heart of nonexistence.
While growing up, children adapt to such painful events by
defensively excluding experiences that would threaten their
caregivers (Bowlby, 1969/1982; see also Chapter 1). They inhibit
that which they perceive would be upsetting, and in doing so,
disconnect from their adaptive emotions—for example, perhaps
emotions that would drive and motivate them to seek out protection
and care from another. The children displaying avoidant patterns,
and the adults who they become, are often described as self-reliant.

Indeed, learning that they cannot count on a satisfying response
from another, they become adept at relying on defensive strategies
to shut down their needs. While this ultimately helps them to
preserve their attachment relationship, these defensive maneuvers
are costly to developing expressiveness in emotional and relational
life. This adaptation becomes hardwired into their nervous systems
and brings about disconnection and protection from experiences
they have learned to predict would ultimately leave them feeling
invisible and annihilated.
These early life experiences and the adaptations they engender
have a twofold impact. The person’s capacity for bidirectional dyadic
engagement with the self and the other has been disrupted. To
maintain connection with their attachment figures, they turn off
awareness of their own attachment needs. It is important to
highlight that maintaining connection is the origin of these
strategies: (a) shutting down awareness of their distress or their
longing for comfort, they employ defenses against emotions and (b)
in the face of caregivers whose states of mind are dismissive, they
“shift attention away from potentially threatening conditions” (Main,
1995, p. 426). By turning their attention away from caregivers, they
utilize defenses against relatedness. From an early age, they
navigate distress with avoidance and distraction. Adapting to
emotional and relational conditions where attuned attention and
responsive care are rare, if not nonexistent, they develop
expectancies that they are better off on their own. Not-needing
becomes the self-protective norm. Yet underneath, there is a lack of
trust that the self is worthy of loving care, and a lack of confidence
that the other is capable and willing to provide love and care.
In fact, the adaptation of self-reliance is pseudo self-reliance.
At a young age, the self can’t provide itself with what is truly
needed.
Nancy Kaplan (1987) studied the responses of 6-year-olds to
drawings in the Separation Anxiety Test. She asked children what a
child (pictured in the drawings) would feel in response to a
separation, and then what they could do. Most children responded to
the separation with “feeling sad, crying or angry.” However, when

asked what they could do about a separation, distinct from the
children who were secure, the children previously classified as
avoidant responded with “I don’t know,” “Nothing,” or “Run away.”
These children were unable to conceive of a strategy to help them
cope with their feelings, even though they were able to name them
(Main et al., 1985). When caregivers fail to respond appropriately to
their children, what naturally would develop is hindered. The seeds
for the child to grow self-understanding about how to be and what
to do with their own feelings remain underground.
Turning off a need is not the same as resolving a need. Shutting
down awareness of emotion is not managing the emotion. Ignoring
emotion narrows the opening that would allow an adaptive response
to emerge. Consequently, self-reliant is not the most accurate way to
describe the person who uses an avoidant pattern. To rely only on
one’s own self falls short. When the self is turning away from people
to avoid being hurt, turning off emotion to avoid being
overwhelmed, and endures alone, the self is a closed system, an
unsustainable ecosystem. Inevitably crimped in their capacity to live
wholeheartedly, they may be missing the vibrancy of a life pulsing
with emotional and relational connection, even suppressing energy-
enriching experiences and the valence of positive emotions. For
when emotions related to fear and anguish and despair and anger
are shut down, positive emotions—those that arise with joyful
experiences of creativity and accomplishment, self-agency,
confidence, and the delight of relational connectedness—are also
diminished.
Which is all the more reason psychotherapists must listen
carefully for the stirrings of the little beings inside the adult who
arrives to psychotherapy. To be available to the one who learned to
not need and became silent, who was rejected and ignored—is to
treasure them with attention and delight. We attend to both positive
and negative affective signals that emerge within themselves or
between us: therapist and patient. Help them to know they can get
satisfaction from sharing with us as we build our psychotherapeutic
relationship.

The Initial Presentation
For many people with avoidant patterns of attachment, attending
psychotherapy is motivated by the despair and frustration of a loved
one who wants more connection. They are sensing that something is
amiss and interferes with the deepening of trust and stability in their
relationship.
People who classify as dismissive/avoidant on the AAI (Main et
al., 1985) have typically displayed a devaluing of attachment
relationships, minimizing their importance—this protective strategy is
often playing out in current life. In their article “The Rooting of the
Mind in the Body,” Fonagy and Target (2007) relate how language
and gesture are meaningful in the way they appear in psychotherapy
dialogue. They track how dismissiveness of attachment relationship
shows up as a “barrenness of the narrative, an emptiness in relation
to the mental world of the people who populate the individual’s
thoughts” (p. 441). The “mind of the other” is not internalized. The
lack of a caring, responsive attachment figure has resulted in a
person showing a minimal capacity to understand the other and/or a
somewhat hollow description of the other.
Fonagy and Target (2007) go on to explain phrases in response
to inquiries about childhood, such as “I don’t know,” “I can’t
remember,” and “It was just normal” as demonstrating what happens
to the children of dismissive parents at a metaphoric level. They see
how “the experience of not being able to retrieve an idea—not being
able to get a hold of the feeling or a thought from the past . . . is
the gesture of dismissive thought.” It is the “not needing and turning
away—the very physical gesture of the avoidant infant upon reunion
with the parent” (p. 441).
So it can be with someone who is sent to psychotherapy by their
well-meaning but frustrated partner. Other than knowing their
partners want more from them, such individuals often have difficulty
in naming what they want from psychotherapy. Their issues mirror
the fallout from their early attachment relationships, leaving them
disconnected from internal, visceral, nonverbal experience, and

limiting their capacity to relate to self and other with acceptance and
understanding. I selected the above quote from R. D. Laing (1969,
quoted in Bromberg, 2011) about being unaware, as it seems to
epitomize the avoidant dilemma.
Psychotherapists benefit from remembering that this
disconnection is an unfortunate consequence of being raised without
enough acceptance, loving care, and responsiveness. And when our
patients present with this pattern, helping them to orient to
themselves with loving and kind acceptance is at the core of what
we do.