8
Working to Transform Patterns of Avoidant
Attachment (Grids 1 and 3)
Every man has his secret sorrows which the world knows not; and often times we call a man cold
when he is only sad.
—HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW (1839)
Avoidance & the Deactivating Strategy
How can psychotherapists provide an affect-facilitating, relationally accompanying
process with someone whose defenses are designed to maintain safety through
avoidance? In this chapter we introduce how to put the grids to use, which we
continue over the following chapters designed to work with each pattern of insecure
and disorganized attachment. We call upon Grid 1, The Configuration of the Secure
Attachment Pattern (see Chapter 5), to help us offer ways to enhance how we set
conditions for building a safe haven with patients prone to avoidance in attachment
relationships. In addition, Grid 1 can help us to recognize signs of secure functioning
when it appears so that we can affirm these patients and help them to recognize and
become familiar with the safety feeling of security, especially when they have an
experience being in connection with themselves at the same time as being in
connection with an Other. Also, we’ve added Grid 4, The Configuration of the Avoidant
Attachment Pattern and Clinical Markers & Interventions, to accompany this chapter.
Grid 4 combines the configuration of the avoidant attachment pattern from Grid 2
with the specified and responsive interventions from Grid 3. Here we have a cross-
reference of markers of the avoidant pattern, such as defenses and regulatory
patterns and the interventions, desirable adaptive action, and the goals of treatment
tailored to address them. Going forward in this chapter we refer to Grid 4 (see Table
8.1) when referencing both the pattern and interventions designed to address
avoidant attachment. The patient state of mind is opposite the caregiver state of mind
to show how adults develop their state of mind with respect to their early experiences
of attachment with their caregivers. Therapist common reactivities are listed below
the patient state of mind and across from the caregiver state of mind to identify the
relationship between the state of mind of the avoidant pattern and the typical
reactivity that might arise in therapists. Across from the characteristic caregiver
behavioral hallmarks are the therapist metaskills, which are suggested qualities for
therapists to cultivate and embody to counter the caregiver hallmarks or help to solve
or provide a positive direction for when we find ourselves in a reaction.

TABLE 8.1  Grid 4. The Configuration of the Avoidant Attachment Pattern and Clinical Markers &
Interventions
 
CONFIGURATION
OF AVOIDANT
ATTACHMENT
AVOIDANT
CLINICAL
MARKERS &
INTERVENTIONS
AVOIDANT
1
Caregiver
characteristics:
state of mind with
respect to
attachment
• Dismissive
Patient state of
mind
Therapist common
reactivities
• Dismissive
• Ineffective
• Intellectualizing
• Intimidated
• Self-doubting
2
Caregiver
characteristics:
behavioral
hallmarks
• Rejecting
• Intrusive
• Humiliating
Therapist
metaskills to
counter caregiver
hallmarks and
therapist common
reactivities
• Acceptance/ kindness
• Respect
• Courage
3
Response to
arousal of the
attachment system
• Deactivation
Desirable adaptive
action
• Affirm relational
adaptive action
tendencies
4
Seeds of Resilience
• Preserves/enables
functioning and
integrity
Goals of
interventions
• Connection/vulnerability
• Recognize own and
other’s needs
5
Characteristic
nervous system
activation and
affect regulation
• Autoregulation
• Overregulates
affect
• Flight
Working with
nervous system
and affect
regulation
• Up regulate
6
Defense:
characteristic
defenses against
relatedness
&
Defense vs.
relatedness:
• Wall of silence
• Dismisses
• Withdraws
Working with
defenses against
relatedness
• Affirm glimmers of
transformance
• Ask permission
• Affirm and/or amplify
glimmers of attachment
strivings, connection,
vulnerability, empathy
characteristic
defenses against
emotion
Defense vs.
emotion:
• Intellectualizes
• Overly detached
• Avoids the past
Working with
defenses against
emotion
• Focus into affect-laden
words, sensations,
imagery
• Empathize with the
defense
• Build awareness and
connection to self
7
Anxiety:
characteristic fears
• Shame
• Rejection
Working with
anxiety
• Build capacity for
dyadic regulation
8
Patterns of affective
competence (or
lack thereof)
• Dealing, but not
feeling
Building affective
competence
• Feel into thoughts
• Build capacity to
process emotional
experience
9
Self–Other
relational
patterning
• Self-reliant
• “Moving away”
Working with Self–
Other relational
patterning
• Build capacity to
connect with and relate
to another

 
CONFIGURATION
OF AVOIDANT
ATTACHMENT
AVOIDANT
CLINICAL
MARKERS &
INTERVENTIONS
AVOIDANT
• Build receptive affective
capacity
10
Internal experience
& external reality:
disconnects (à la
Fonagy)
Pretend mode:
• Internal,
decoupled from
external world
Connecting
internal experience
& external reality
• Build self-reflective
capacity
• Understand other
(Pando-Mars, 2016)
(Note. These are nonexhaustive lists)
Copyright © 2025 Pando-Mars
In order to prepare ourselves to treat our patients, it behooves psychotherapists to
recognize that the way our patients have been treated has become internalized and
often appears through their own state of mind. So someone who grew up with a
dismissive parent is very likely to behave in dismissive ways with themselves and
others. For psychotherapists, this means that our patients might be dismissive with
us. Depending on our own attachment history, events of the day or purely out of
surprise that our usually welcomed therapist stance is being rebuffed, we might find
ourselves in an unintended reaction. For this, in Grid 4 we name therapist common
reactivities (see Chapter 6, p. 188, for discussion) to highlight some of the potential
reactions we might be having and to help us recognize that this is happening as soon
as possible so we can recalibrate. We also have a section for therapist metaskills
(Chapter 6, p. 190), the intentional sensitivities that we can call upon to counter
expectancies related to caregiver hallmark behavior in our patients, to help us counter
our own reactivity to our patients’ dismissive state of mind, and to expand our
capacity to set the sturdiest conditions for a successful psychotherapy outcome.
In my experience, having knowledge of these potential places of reaction to my
patients has helped me to recognize sooner when I am triggered or caught up in
reaction to one of my patients. While not easy to shake off, since by the nature of
being triggered one’s prefrontal cortex goes offline, I have discovered that it is helpful
to know that these potential reactivities exist. By having a practice of attuning to
myself, I am more available to register when I am feeling intimidated by the
dismissive gesture of my patient. This awareness helps me be quicker to set myself
right and our relationship back on course with kindness and curiosity. We provide
examples and opportunities for discussion about therapist common reactivities and
the importance of therapist metaskills as we proceed through this chapter.
Goals of Treatment
When working with someone who uses patterns of avoidance and has a dismissive
state of mind, building their capacity to relate to self and others is a primary goal of
treatment. Grid 4 highlights relational action tendencies as desired adaptive action for

this pattern. Relational action tendencies include (a) being open to the giving and
receiving of attention and empathy to another; (b) feeling close, moved, and tender
with another; and (c) recognition of one’s own needs and the needs of others (Fosha,
2000b). Healing avoidant attachment involves deep rewiring of meaningful connection
with loved ones and meaningful emotional connection within oneself, deepening the
capacity for seeing and being seen, and for understanding and being understood in
relationship.
For therapists, one of the ways we use ourselves is lending our capacity to
perceive and to reflect significant markers and signals to our patients to help them
reestablish their own awareness and capacity to receive. Our recognizing and
affirming signs of relational action tendencies is essential to healing patterns of
avoidant attachment. Helping our patients to cultivate kindness and acceptance of
vulnerability; to learn how to connect to their somatic, emotional, and relational
experiences; and to recognize their own needs and the needs of others are major
goals of interventions to help them increase their relational capacities. In this chapter,
we reference the grids and AEDP representational schemas as we discuss how to
organize our conceptualizations and orient patients to treatment. Then we present
specific intervention sequences with clinical vignettes to target particular areas of
avoidant attachment and show how to help patients move toward healing and
transformation.
From the Get-Go
John Bowlby (1988) describes how psychotherapists can draw from attachment theory
and serve as an attachment figure who provides a secure base and a secure haven for
patients in psychotherapy. Mario Mikulincer (2015) has researched “secure priming” to
show how people can intentionally evoke a sense of security. AEDP elaborates
significant factors of the therapist stance that set the stage for a secure-functioning
attachment relationship. Providing welcome and delight, a focus on transformance,
healing from the get-go, and undoing aloneness are a few of the key intervention
sequences to call upon. As we proceed, we look at how to apply specific attention to
those who appear with avoidant attachment patterns, and we explore what
ingredients would be most salient with them to establishing conditions for safety and
security.
Developing positive expectancies to offset the anticipation of rejection and negativity.
Given that avoidant strategies were formed in anticipation of a negative reaction from
an Other, how therapists welcome and introduce the patient to psychotherapy is
crucial. We want to meet our patients who enter psychotherapy with acceptance,
kindness, and respect, offering new possibilities for developing positive expectancies
of self and other. From the get-go, we aim to provide alternative experiences to offset
the anticipation of rejection and negative response to emotion or relational contact.
To heal, our patients need to make use of the therapeutic process and be open to
receiving help and care. For someone with such limited experience of truly being able

to lean on another, this is a tall order! We want to build a secure base that will lead to
genuine exploration, discovery, and self-understanding. And we need to cultivate this
with close attention to building alliance and collaboration with our patients. Our aim is
to help them build their connection to self while also growing trust in relationship with
an other.
Respecting the adaptive nature of protective mechanisms. When psychotherapists
encounter avoidant self-reliance and deactivating strategies in our patients, it is
paramount to remember that these strategies exist for the protective function that
they serve. That they exist is an indication that they were needed. The challenge, like
the quote from R. D. Laing (1969, quoted in Bromberg, 2011) about being unaware,
is that disconnection begets disconnection, and the reason for such disconnection
gets lost. It can be helpful for psychotherapists to respect the adaptive nature of such
protective mechanisms as we initiate contact with our new patients. How they enter
our space tells us something about them. How we meet them tells them something
about us.
The Therapist Stance: Therapist Common Reactivities and Metaskills
With a spirit of welcome and interest, as we inquire about the patient’s purpose for
coming to therapy, we can also listen for how they feel about reaching out for help.
Their feelings about reaching out for help may reveal expectancies related to an
avoidant pattern. From these first moments we do our best to attune and show
empathy as we pay attention to what happens relationally, and how the flow between
us moves. In Grid 3, Clinical Markers & Interventions to Treat Patterns of Avoidant,
Ambivalent/Resistant, and Disorganized Attachment, we noted a few therapists’
common reactivities that may occur when engaging in an experiential and relationally
oriented psychotherapy with patients who present with avoidance. In turn, we have
identified specific therapist metaskills that can help psychotherapists set the stage for
treatment, as well as provide a way to help us to regain our footing when these
common reactivities occur.
Therapist common reactivities. Therapist common reactivities may arise as our
unintended yet potential reactions to the expression of some of our patient’s
avoidant/dismissive behaviors. In the face of avoidance, psychotherapists may find
ourselves feeling intimidated, ineffective, and self-doubting, or we may become overly
intellectual. It is helpful to keep an eye on what is stirred within us, so that as soon as
possible we can attend to what we need to be present. We can consciously raise our
awareness to bring in certain metaskills to help us face what is happening and to find
a constructive, kind, and respectful way to engage.
Therapist metaskills. Metaskills can be considered intentional sensitivities that
psychotherapists can draw upon to establish a positive relational foundation for
patients with insecure attachment. Therapist metaskills of acceptance/respect and

kindness can counter caregiver hallmarks of rejecting, humiliating, or intrusive
behaviors that give rise to avoidant attachment behaviors. The therapist metaskill of
courage can be inspiring when we are finding our way to move toward patients whose
dismissing gestures may stir our own attachment systems. Remembering that our
patients’ avoidant reactions have been forged by rejection or humiliation, having
courage can help us to strengthen our presence as we aim toward providing a
positive, new experience.
Much of the research on attachment-informed psychotherapy states the
importance of establishing the therapeutic alliance with a secure base from the start
(Bowlby, 1988; Mikulincer et al., 2012). Mikulincer discusses “a client’s attachment
security in therapy is associated with more positive attitudes toward therapy and more
constructive therapeutic behavior, such as deeper self-disclosure and more complete
inner exploration” (p. 610). Beginning with how we receive the patient, being
accepting, kind, and respectful seems like the just right beginning to set the stage for
building a patient’s attachment security in psychotherapy. And if we falter, tending to
what may be a therapist common reactivity seems like a necessary safety net for our
own attachment security.
Of the metaskills, acceptance is key and transformance detection offers a
phenomenal way to do just this. The very act of showing up for psychotherapy reveals
transformance in motion. When a patient with avoidant tendencies opens with self-
reflection or responds contingently to our questions, such relatedness harkens
transformance. When we notice transformance glimmers and affirm these attributes in
our patient right off the bat, we can convey our intention to support them and build a
foundation in which safety and collaboration can be discovered. We emphasize our
desire to see them in their wholeness from the first moments of being together.
In the next section we explore how to bring acceptance into the forefront and then
continue to explore transformance detection in the following section.
Acceptance as Antidote to Rejection
Holding that our initial psychotherapy sessions are orienting us to each other and to
what our dyad might need to function optimally, we can be present to meet and
accept what shows up moment by moment. One way to show acceptance is by
receiving what the patient offers in the way the patient offers it. What if the patient
answers a question with a short, clipped response and a shrug of the shoulders? I can
lean in and echo the clipped response and tilt my head with curiosity about what their
shrug is saying to me, receiving this as a significant communication. In ordinary
conversation, a friend could feel pushed away by the shrug, and the conversation
might go flat. In psychotherapy, a therapist common reactivity might appear, for
example, if I feel intimidated or self-doubtful with the patient’s gesture. I might need
to draw upon the metaskill of courage to move toward what may seem dismissive
from the patient. I might need to pause and notice when I feel intimidated by a
patient’s word or gesture and take a breath and feel my feet on the floor.

Stepping in with courage means being willing to accept and engage with the
patient’s signals that appear dismissive. In our therapeutic conversation, I want to
receive these signals as meaningful. They may be showing me that the patient
expects not to be heard or taken seriously. They may reveal the patient’s mixed
feelings about being here. Such signals are an implicit communication to explore; they
are significant. The more accepting I can be of the totality of the patient’s response,
the better. I want to be open to what the patient shares, to transmit a sense of
enoughness to my patient. Perhaps when I move toward rather than away in the face
of dismissiveness, I am modeling a new possibility. Whatever takes place is grist for
the mill and we can appreciate that the process of reaching out for help might just
bring about complex feelings. Being seen with this complexity can provide relief to the
fear of being judged.
Meaning and understanding are constructed by moment-to-moment exchanges of
information. On this psychotherapeutic journey, by receiving what my patient offers,
we can make use of it to encourage what may emerge next, naturally. When early life
experiences of rejection have built-in negative anticipations of not being enough, we
can counter this by mirroring the substance of what is being communicated. Herein
lies the transformance detection: to affirm what is forthcoming and help the individual
to value their experience by showing our acceptance, interest, and appreciating what
they offer. Attuning and attending to what occurs within ourselves is also important to
this process. It involves being able to monitor and regulate what happens internally,
and to choose what serves the intention for establishing our therapeutic container,
which Winnicott (1960) refers to as the “holding environment,” and Bion (1962)
discusses as “containment” related to a caregiver’s capacity to be with their child’s
emotional experience, with neither overwhelm nor rejection.
Transformance Detection
The AEDP stance of detecting transformance is vital to establishing the conditions that
can evoke a sense of safety and trust, especially with someone who developed
avoidant strategies. Showing kindness is a very important influence to fostering the
security of attachment. Affirming patients that we see some of their most important
motivating drives and actions is a way to validate them and help to provide a secure
base for the work of self-exploration. When we can identify and reflect what we see
as their value (i.e., when we affirm them), we help our patients to recognize and
connect with knowing what truly matters to them. We want to allow the space and
potential for transformance glimmers to shine bright: We want to be ready to be
surprised by unexpected capacities that go counter to their attachment patterning and
reveal something essential of their human spirit.
Look for qualities that demonstrate the patient’s core values. From the start, looking
for qualities that demonstrate the person’s core values helps us to discover that which
provides meaning and direction in their lives. Many people whose primary attachment
strategies are avoidant are plenty capable and effective in their work and identify with

accomplishment and success in the world. They are capable of dealing, less so
feeling. Dealing in the world has often been rewarding and given them ways to
provide for their families and loved ones. Expressing feelings at home is often mixed
and can run the gamut from what goes unspoken to what erupts in explosion. Not
speaking freely about their inner workings leaves their partners pressing for more
connection. Often, their partners have urged them to seek out therapy to “get in
touch with their feelings,” conveying that something is lacking in this realm.
Affirmation. At the beginning of treatment, with such challenges in mind, I want to
establish a base of support by affirming what I find noteworthy, which may not be
what is acknowledged by their significant others. For example, when describing work,
the person may light up when telling me about their resources that contribute to how
they are supporting their families. While expressing the meaning this gives them, I
get a sense of the depth of their relational care. Affirming this depth of care may
come as a surprise to the patient, as longing for more emotional closeness is what
provokes their partner’s dissatisfaction, which is often at a saturation point by the
time they have come to therapy. I have repeatedly noticed a discrepancy between
what they report to me about what they feel on the inside, and what they express
verbally at home. By encouraging conditions that help their self-at-best to come
online, patients often locate a deeper range of affect than they can access when they
are in the thick of their self-at-worst patterning.
In the compromised state of self-at-worst, when fear of rejection is looming,
expression is inhibited. Anticipatory anxiety interferes with the patient’s connection to
what they know and feel on the inside. Amid describing to me how confusing and
even overwhelming their partner’s bids for intimacy can be, what may emerge are
deep fears about the perceived threat of rejection or loss, as well as shame secondary
to fears of personal inadequacy. These themes relate to their historical trauma and
attachment-level wounding. Yet as we begin, we can affirm the profound care that
they have not quite fully expressed verbally with their loved one. We can acknowledge
and empathize with the complexity of how showing care is intertwined with fear of
rejection (Frederick, 2019). Leaning into their capacity to care provides a stark, yet
helpful contrast to what happens at home when they are confronted with frustration
and complaint about their lack of expressing feelings. As an antidote to shame and
not-enoughness, we help our patients reorient to what is true on the inside. We are
establishing a larger and wider foundation for the work of psychotherapy. Being met
can be productive, and yet, befuddling to the patient, at first.
By allowing space for the emergence of core experiences, we can begin to see
how a great sensitivity may lie underneath a toughened exterior. When their partner’s
protest and distress pierce through the protective barriers, instead of gaining access
to a caring response, what may be touched and activated, is hurt inside and a sense
of inadequacy. Thus, the need for the hard steel of defenses. Noticing and reflecting
sensitivity to their original attachment wounding back to the patient, sensing this as a
transformance glimmer, creates an intrapsychic crisis and it surprises the unconscious
(George et al., 1984; Main, 1995), in a good way. Prepared for being shamed and

humiliated for being out of touch with feelings, our reflection that their sensitivity
interferes with their positive and caring attributes belies their expectations, often
melts defenses, and can contribute to a strong therapeutic alliance—from the get-go.
For us to regard and recognize their strengths alongside their challenges, a larger
understanding and perspective can be relieving and stimulating for the patient who
has been living in the confines of their avoidant patterning.
And yet, for some patients, the AEDP therapist’s affective expressiveness,
empathy, and self-disclosure of connection can be disconcerting, and thereby evoke—
by contrast—their attachment trauma and trigger expectancies of humiliation or
rejection. Sooner or later, and usually sooner, something exceeds the narrow window
of tolerance for emotional connection, and the road gets bumpy. What is in the room
is the result of those avoidant and dismissive protective patterns. It is here, in many
therapeutic dyads, where transformance detection can fall flat. The glimmers are
either miniscule and/or we can’t see them. Or if we do, our reflection of them is met
with dismissal. Here, the transformance path is often overlooked when the therapist
becomes stalled by a wall of silence, dismissiveness, or intellectualization. However,
seeking out glimmers of motivation and health, and affirming when the patient is on
track, are powerful interventions and essential to call upon, again and again,
throughout treatment. Like water running over rocks, don’t underestimate the power
of our consistent and insistent attention to accumulate and penetrate the surface.
Over time we continue to look for new openings. As poet and songwriter Leonard
Cohen (1992) croons, “There is a crack in everything / That’s how the light gets in . . .
”
Organizing Experiential Work With AEDP Representational
Schemas
The Triangle of Experience: Arousal and Affect Regulation
To help someone reorient to their felt experience and face what they have avoided
their whole life, it helps to have a way to track what is happening in the present
moment. As described in Chapter 3, the AEDP triangle of experience (TOE; see Figure
3.2) is a representational schema we can use to map interaction sequences, and
thereby choose intervention strategies. The TOE incorporates Row 3 and Rows 5–8, of
Grids 1 and 2: (a) a patient’s response to attachment system arousal, (b) affect
regulation, (c) defenses, (d) anxiety, and (e) affective competence (see Chapter 5, pp.
156–162). While the grids identify the characteristics of each pattern of attachment,
the TOE provides a way to structure our experiential work. At the top two corners of
the triangle are defenses and anxiety. Core affective experiences is at the bottom.
Defenses are the behaviors and strategies used to move away from emotional or
relational experiences. Anxiety is the activation of the nervous system, which rises
with anticipations. Core affective experiences refers to three varieties of affective
experiences, such as categorical emotions, self, and relational affective experiences

(see Chapter 3, pp. 104–105). Categorical emotions are the self’s reaction to events.
Self-affective experiences are the self’s reading of the self. Relational affective
experiences are the self’s reading of the emotional status of the relationship (Fosha,
2000b).
Earlier in this chapter, we identified one of the goals of treatment of avoidant
patterning, as the release of relational adaptive action tendencies, such as being
available to the giving and receiving of care and empathy with another. In the section
on core affective experience, included in the avoidant TOE, we identify a few aspects
of relational affective experiences that feature in this work with someone with
avoidant patterning in our aim to heal the relational wounding that develops through
experiences of rejection, humiliation, and disregard. Of course, relational affective
experiences are also of great importance in therapeutic work with
ambivalent/resistant and disorganized attachment. However, we emphasize the
central importance of working on relational experiences while working with the
avoidant pattern to counter the defensive self-reliance and avoidance of seeking help
that is at the core of that pattern. In Chapter 10, which is working with
ambivalent/resistant attachment, we identify self-affective experiences as key to the
goals of ambivalent patterning treatment. Of course, self experiences—authentic
expression, development of agency, will, and desire, and the expression of attachment
strivings and core needs—are integral to working with avoidant and disorganized
attachment as well. However, we focus on self experiences with the ambivalent
pattern because of how much the self is sacrificed in the desperate reach for the
other. We say more about relational affective experiences in the section following the
avoidant Self–Other–Emotion (SOE) triangle later in this chapter. By tracking our
patients verbally and nonverbally on a moment-to-moment basis, we can identify
whether they are going through an affective experience, anxiety, or defense, and the
relationship between them. For instance, when emotion stirs, are they able to let it
happen or do they become anxious or defensively shut down?
In the case of the person relying on avoidant strategies, their core experiences are
often outside of awareness. Someone may come to therapy recognizing that certain
patterns appear in relationships without understanding the heart of the problem.
When their attachment behavioral system is aroused, the avoidant pattern uses
deactivating strategies to disconnect from it and from the emotions associated with
their attachment strivings. The person behaving with these patterns does not seek
proximity in time of need but rather avoids the Other. They disconnect not only from
the Other but from their need for the other, which would prompt such seeking. In
turn, they may shut down the experience of emotion. This becomes an affect-
regulation strategy. When the person is distressed and in need of tending and care,
the attachment system is turned off to avoid further disappointment and injury. The
use of defenses replaces reaching toward another and shuts down awareness of the
experience of emotion and the longing for contact.
Closely tracking the patient’s movement toward and away from affective
experience is vital for psychotherapists engaging in an experiential process. By
helping our patients to notice what happens in their body as they are speaking, we

can help them to register signals that are markers of emotion, anxiety, or defense.
Depending on what appears, we can address the process with specificity. When
signals of anxiety appear, we can help our clients to discover their window of
tolerance. There needs to be enough activation in the nervous system to allow
unresolved material to surface. And the patient needs to be able to bear and process
what is emerging. Helping clients to notice how they move among defense, anxiety,
and emotion is useful for increasing their awareness of how they can regulate contact
with emotion and relatedness. When our clients engage their defenses, we can help
them to identify how this may be a self-protective pattern of response and to become
curious about where it comes from.
A question for attachment-oriented psychotherapists to consider is “How do we
engage ourselves, so that our patients don’t have to resort to their defenses?” Our
aim is to set the conditions to explore the dynamic unfolding process as a sensitive
and responsive Other, building a collaborative alliance with respect and kindness. And
help. We help patients orient to the present moment and build connection to their
somatic experience. We explore what is happening that might be summoning the
defense. Often expectancies may be arising in anticipation of a negative reaction from
another. We can offer accompaniment and care in tolerable doses, to explore what
happens between us, and notice whether any signals imply threat or concern. And we
listen sincerely to note what the patient might be sensing or feeling and take the time
to discern whether there has been a misattunement or disconnect that needs
acknowledgment and repair. Tracking the process, we affirm our patients when they
stretch beyond avoidance, and support and affirm efforts they make to let go of
defense to try something new. The more we can point patients to notice how their
patterns of avoidance serve to protect them through disconnection, often more
motivation emerges to try new steps.
The TOE: Avoidant
Defenses against emotion. When the patient has difficulty connecting with moment-
to-moment experience and instead tells stories, moves away from the inquiry about
affect, appears overly detached, or disconnected from what is happening in the
present moment, we are in the land of defenses against emotion. Shutting down and
intellectualizing are two defenses against emotion that helped the person to manage
being overwhelmed, suffering the aloneness or intense affects by disengaging from
helplessness at a time of need. Defenses against emotion break the connection to
self, which was an adaptative move to disconnect from what might threaten the
attachment figure in order to preserve the attachment bond for big picture survival.
Defenses against relatedness. When the patient is uncomfortable with our attention,
finds our efforts to validate and affirm too patronizing, or physically turns away, as
was described by not looking at the mother when she returned in the Strange
Situation, we may be in the terrain of defenses against relatedness. The patient’s use
of dismissiveness, gaze aversion, and withdrawal are some defenses against

relatedness to ensure against exposing vulnerability and to counter the potential of
being rejected. When it comes to the historical past, their verbal patterning can
appear like a wall of silence, signaling the minimizing of attachment relationships as
seen in the AAI. Defenses against relatedness break the connection to other, to
protect from the feared and expected rejection, humiliation, disappointments, or
intrusions and were an adaptative move to protect the integrity of the self.


Figure 8.1 The Triangle of Experience: Avoidant
Pando-Mars, 2024, adapted from Fosha, 2020
These defenses are depicted on the upper left corner of the TOE (see Figure 8.1).
Anxiety is depicted on the upper right corner. Someone who is avoiding, using a
deactivating strategy, may appear to have “apparent low anxiety.” This is not to say
that they do not experience anxiety. The low-level display of anxiety is evidence of the
deactivating strategy that occurs in response to arousal of their attachment behavioral
system. Whether the triggering is based internally with activation of an emotional
need or externally in response to an attachment figure, the typical avoidant response
is to withdraw and conserve energy. Hence, there is difficulty for the ordinary
observer to identify that the person behind these avoidant patterns may be feeling
anxious. At the bottom of the TOE are maladaptive and adaptive core affective
experiences. On the maladaptive side we find pathogenic affects and unbearable
states of traumatic aloneness, which need transforming. While on the adaptive side,
core affective emotion or relational experiences are transforming, necessary for
healing and knowing the self.
Working With Defenses Against Emotion and Disconnection From Self
The dismissive pattern also disconnects the person from their self. Not only is the
connection to the other broken but so is the connection to the self. Defenses against
emotion block awareness of what is arising in the self, in an adaptive move to manage
perceived overwhelm that deflects the need for an attachment figure. When a person
disavows and shuts down emotion and affective experiences, and instead turns to
analyzing or trying to figure things out, the whole of their experience is incomplete.
Relying on thinking and reasoning while avoiding affective experience is partial at
best, which is another reason we identify the pseudo aspect of self-reliance.
Operating without listening to signals that arise naturally through our bodies and
being out-of-touch and disconnected from knowing what we sense and feel on a
visceral and emotional level, we miss out on the adaptive action tendencies of
emotions and what Panksepp (2009) refers to as “ancestral tools for living.” Fosha
(2000b) referred to this pattern as “dealing, but not feeling.” Without the valence and
enriching qualities of lived emotions, our capacity for fulfilling relationships, especially
with loved ones, is often diminished.
In psychotherapy, one facet of defenses against emotion and disconnection to self
is being disconnected from emotional experience when it occurs in the moment.
When therapists ask open-ended questions like “How are you feeling about this?,” we
may be met with a blank stare or shrug of the shoulders. Reflecting specific changes,
such as voice tone or posture, to the patient can orient their development of
awareness. I focus my patients’ attention by asking, “Do you notice how your voice
became so intent as you said that?” or “I see you shifting your posture and sitting up
really tall right now, are you aware of what is bringing this shift?” By sharing what I
notice, I can provide a landing pad for their awareness. Sometimes signals appear

from the body that provide an entry point for exploration. As is shown in the following
case illustration, being specific and providing a focus can be helpful.
Case Illustration
Clinical Vignette 8A, Part 1: “Are You Aware of Your Tears?”
THERAPIST (TH): Okay (hand on heart). Well, let’s just slow down. [Slowing down is
critical to experiential work and identifying patterns of response.]
GAYLE (PATIENT, PT): (tears appear) Every time he leaves . . . (speaking through tears
appearing in her eyes)
TH: I see emotion coming. [Making the implicit explicit, attuning to and
resonating with the bottom of the TOE.]
PT: (smiles) Okay. [In response to my comment, she slows down.]
TH: Do you notice your tears? [Bringing her attention to the emergence of her
tears, which she missed due to her self-at-worst defensive avoidance.]
PT: (shakes her head side to side) I didn’t even notice them, no. [Noticing that she
didn’t notice engages her self-at-best awareness.]
TH: (smiles warmly) As I ask, do you notice? [I ask this so that she can connect
(admit) to becoming aware of having tears.]
PT: Yes (nodding).
TH: Good for you. [Affirmation of her opening the aperture of her awareness.]
Intervention: notice and reflect glimmers of emotion. When I reflect “I see tears” to
this patient, Gayle, I note her surprise that she is unaware of tears forming at the
corners of her eyes. When I ask Gayle, “Are you aware of these tears?” and she says,
“No,” I then ask, “When I name them are you aware of them?” to which she says,
“Yes.” Taking small steps allows me to reflect what I notice, and then to check in to
see whether the patient is aware of what I see. If they are not, the next intervention
is to discover, if, with our help, they can tune into something that may already be
happening. This allows us to hold both that the patient is unaware, and yet, once
mirrored, they can become aware and pay attention to the tears that are there.
Generating new connections provides a new experience that can be grounds for
revising a belief like “I don’t show feelings” or “Not being seen is better and safer
than being seen.”
The big picture. At times, patients interpret their displays of emotion as evidence of
weakness, especially when they sense that their defenses are breaking down. Being
vulnerable is simply not okay and must be prevented. As therapist I hold the big
picture, seeing how fear of exposure is a foreboding that harkens back to some
dreadful experiences early on, leaving the person guarding against being demeaned
or disdained. Fear of overwhelm comes from being alone with unbearable, confusing,

or bewildering experiences. Fear supplies the motive to shut out awareness, to shut
out and keep out anything that would hurt or belittle or bring excruciating
vulnerability. So, my job is to model for my patient how to befriend whatever emerges
from their somatic/affective experience and relational cues. I want to be an ally in
helping them notice and attend to their unfamiliar signals. I know that a lack of
awareness does not mean nothing is happening. Throughout, I attempt to set
conditions for relational safety, so that ultimately relational adaptive action tendencies
can emerge.
Together, we can detect internal promptings and patients can learn how to allow
themselves to get to know aspects of self that have been hidden, even to their own
minds and hearts. I affirm the steps they take toward unfolding experience. I name
what I see and hear, in a voice that conveys respect and interest so that the patient
can know where I am coming from, so their neuroception picks up cues of safety as I
mirror them. Bit by bit, with presence and persistence, we foster their capacity to
become more self-aware and capable of shifting hard-and-fast defenses into flexible
defenses that are amenable to give, so that the original emotion below wounding can
surface. Once revealed, the pathway to resolving injury gets clearer.
Defenses Against Relatedness: Not-Needing Others as a Defense Against Rrrrreally
Needing Others—Self-Reliance as a Defense Against Relatedness and Needs for
Interpersonal Connection
The lack of connection to oneself and to one’s emotional life brings challenges and
difficulties in relating to, and with, another. To truly comprehend this pattern, we must
explore the interweave of its origins. Originally, defenses against relatedness
protected the person against feeling the distress, discomfort, and agonizing
experiences of not having been truly seen, historically. These defenses provided
escape from rejection, intrusion, humiliation, or other belittling, dehumanizing
experiences. Thus, they served to ward off despair. These defenses protect the
integrity of the self, by defensively excluding awareness of anything that would
threaten the stability of self. Fear of falling apart is terrifying. Cutting-off awareness of
an Other is a way to disconnect from needing an Other. This protection serves to
avoid experiencing the very painful emotions stirred by active or passive rejection.
The lack of response hurts so badly. In adult primary relationships, the defense
against needing others moves in both directions, against being needed by another
emotionally, as well as needing another emotionally.
Disrupted drives toward connection. Here we are up against the ruptures that
occurred between the person’s attachment behavioral system and the attachment
caregiving system. When a child is moved by their attachment behavioral system to
seek proximity in times of distress, and their attachment figure is rejecting, intrusive,
or otherwise unavailable, the person’s trust in innate motivational drives to seek
connection are disrupted. Thus, they develop difficulties not only in receiving care, but
in providing care. When the biological wiring to care and be cared for breaks down, it

leaves emptiness and aloneness in its wake. This is precisely why a psychotherapy
relationship that draws from attachment theory to restore safety and security is crucial
to the repair of these intrinsic attachment behavioral systems.
Exploring therapeutic interactions in the present moment. In Bowlby’s (1973, 1988)
description of how psychotherapists can provide a secure haven for patients in
psychotherapy, he specifically describes that the work of psychotherapy is to use our
base so that the patient can explore how their internalized representations of their
failed relationships are still operating unconsciously to predict danger and keep them
safe. However, these models have become inflexible, and instead of gathering
information in present time, assessing and basing choices in the here-and-now our
patients become activated based on expectancies and old rules from their internal
working models. To help our patients heal the deep-seated rupture between proximity
and caregiving, between giving and receiving care, psychotherapists have the
therapeutic task and the meaningful opportunity for repairing and restoring trust in
relationship. We do this in the present moment by making sure to challenge
expectancies by referencing what is happening in the here-and-now between each of
us as we establish our therapeutic relationship.
And yet, the pathway toward a relationally oriented psychotherapy might be
fraught. When psychotherapists ask about the experience of the relationship between
ourselves and the patient, we might touch the absence of a template for
accompaniment, encountering someone for whom being understood was a rarity
rather than the norm. For someone with avoidant patterning, these inquiries have the
potential to generate defensive intellectualization or distracting generalizations. The
person might use dismissing words or gestures to push us away, really pushing away
the historical source of discomfort. When therapists ask questions that patients don’t
have answers to, they might expect to be criticized. Subsequent feelings of
inadequacy and shame might even be reminiscent of challenges in their primary
relationship.
Therapist common reactivities. Dismissiveness as a defensive or protective strategy
operates reflexively and automatically. When the therapist is nearing what has been
experienced by the patient as dangerous territory, even the therapist’s best intentions
might be misperceived or simply not understood. The patient’s dismissive hand
gesture or turn of the head, whether subtle or strong, can have a powerful impact on
the therapist. Encountering the implicit rejection in dismissiveness might
understandably activate the therapist’s own attachment wounds and trigger our own
self-at-worst internal working model. Here, therapist common reactivities are likely to
appear. When faced with dismissiveness or intellectualization, therapists can
sometimes feel inadequate or doubt our effectiveness when our interventions don’t
land. When activated by a lack of response or dismissiveness in the patient, we might
overexplain our intentions or get on a roll with psycho-ed. Inadvertently, we end up
touting an intellectual lecture rather than leaning in with help and direction.

Using metaskills: being intentional with kindness and willingness to explore. When
therapists can replace defensiveness with openness and mindfully regulate our own
reactions, we can engage with intention. We can bring in a spirit of lightheartedness
and curiosity to explore what brings about dismissiveness in the present moment,
making the implicit explicit. We want to fortify our empathic understanding of our
patient’s formidable challenge. When we search under the surface and make room to
hold the question “What made such defenses necessary in the first place?,” we slow
down our own reactions and recalibrate with a spirit of interest and willingness to
explore. Slowly and carefully, moment-to-moment tracking can lead to the emergence
of what has deep roots in survival. With kindness and willingness to explore we build
collaborative curiosity and compassion, which can go a long way toward building
understanding and bringing online both the patient’s and the therapist’s self-at-best.
Thus, we pave the way for our patients’ openness and willingness to take the small
steps needed to access bottom-up experience and discovery.
Core Affective Experiences: Processing Emotion and Relational Affective Experiences
Core affective experiences. Core affective experiences are represented at the bottom
of the TOE. In addition to categorical emotions (sadness, anger, fear, disgust,
surprise, and joy) an important part of core affective experiences are relational
affective experiences. One aspect of helping our patients reduce their defenses
against relatedness is working explicitly and directly with relational affective
experiences. These include asymmetrical relational experiences (attachment) in which
one person in the dyad assumes the role of “older, wiser other” who is there to care
and help the “younger, more vulnerable one.” Symmetrical relational (intersubjective)
experiences occur as each person in the dyad enjoys the pleasure or acknowledgment
of shared experience, meeting human to human. Additionally, we attend to
coordinated relational experiences: coordination and miscoordination, attunement,
disruption, and repair. For many of our patients, repair was not part of the picture;
disruption and miscoordination were not followed by recoordination and repair. So it is
especially important that psychotherapists attune to how our exchanges unfold with
our patients, as our interactive sequences are fertile ground for exploration. Another
significant relational affective experience is the receptive affective capacity of our
patients. Are they able to take in and make use of our help, care, availability, and
accompaniment? Examples of these relational affective experiences occur in the
following clinical vignette:
Clinical Vignette 8B, Part 1: “Don’t Be Fooled Again!”
Here is a vignette in which what starts off as a seemingly benign minimization of the
significance of the therapist’s care takes us into the patient’s direct prohibition against
daring to trust that anyone would care. “Don’t believe …,” is quite the admonition.
Slow and deliberate unpacking what is stirred in the present-moment relational
experience brings this message from the depths of self-protection. It illustrates how

AEDP explicitly explores the experience of attachment in the moment-to-moment
experience between therapist and patient.
The session begins with an established patient, Beth, whom I have seen in couples
therapy for over a year. While this is our first individual session, we have a fair
amount of trust in our work together. During this meeting, with each of our selves-at-
best online, notice how despite the fear we remain in communication while traversing
self-at-worst conditioning. At the beginning of this session, Beth admitted feeling
nervous, yet also acknowledged feeling safe. As the session unfolded, she
encountered an early memory of being a little girl who longed to have special time
with her father. Yet, simultaneously, she was terrified of doing the wrong thing that
would bring him to reject her. In our session, when sadness emerged, Beth became
baffled and confused. She struggled to make sense of the emotion, and subsequently
that I would want to be with her.
This scene illustrates that even though we have established trust between us,
when the attachment system is activated, doubt emerges. We enter here in the
moment as Beth recalls how alone she was as a child, and I bring our attention into
the present moment with me.
BETH (PATIENT, PT): If I had had one person, one adult who had been kind, loving . . .
or somebody to just ask me who I was or what I thought about . . . [This longing
is a transformance striving.]
THERAPIST (TH): Well, that’s what I feel like I want to do right now. I’m really loving
getting to know who you are and what you thought about. [I make a specific
self-disclosure to express my sincere interest and care.] What happens
when I say that? What’s it like for you to know that I want to know you, what you
think about, feel about? [I immediately follow by inquiring about her
experience of my sharing. I want to check her receptive affective capacity
to see what she can take in from me.]
PT: I think I’m not convinced anybody really wants to know who I am. It’s hard for me
to really believe that. [Origins of the avoidant pattern]
TH: Yeah . . .
PT: (nodding)
TH: It’s hard for you to believe that I want to know you. [Amplifying and making it
explicit in the direct experience of our relationship. My tone is sincere,
with kind inquiry.]
PT: Yeah.
TH: What happens when you look at me? When I say I want to know you? [I make
the relational experiential with a here-and-now request, to see what she
can perceive.] What do you see in my eyes?
Explore what happens in the present moment between therapist and patient. As Beth
expresses her mistrust, I explore what is arising in the moment, and ask her to see
what she can see in my eyes. I want to engage her perception here-and-now to see
what happens if she can see beyond what she expects, and if she can make use of

our present-moment experience to offset her historically based expectancies that no
one really cares what she thinks and feels.
PT: You’re all blurry, I can’t see without my glasses—that helps. (laughs) [Humor is a
delightful way to regulate anxiety.]
TH: It does help . . . okay in this blurry state . . . [I stay with her.] What do you see
through the blur? [I meet her with laughter to bring some dyadic
regulation, while also keeping the focus.]
PT: I can see.
TH: What do you see?
PT: I don’t doubt your sincerity. (The tone of her voice deepens and drops down.) I
just don’t believe that anybody really wants to know me. [Side by side we see
the glimmer of the new, with “I don’t doubt your sincerity,” followed by
the assertion of the old “I just don’t believe that anybody really wants to
know me.”]
TH: You don’t believe and that comes from way inside, right? And so when you see
me, you don’t doubt my sincerity. What does happen? [I acknowledge her belief
and encourage her to explore what is newly emerging in the here-and-
now with me.]
PT: Well, I have a whole defense: “She doesn’t really want to know, that she’s, well,
this is part of the therapy . . . ” [Although she notices her defense, she still
minimizes what she can take in from me.]
TH: These are all the thoughts, but what happens with your eyes, when your eyes are
seeing my eyes? [Bypassing the defense, staying with the direct relational
experience.]
PT: My eyes tell me that you are truly here; truly looking at me, really want to know . .
. (tense voice)
TH: And how, what’s that like to . . . [Metaprocessing.]
PT: That’s hard for me to trust. [Beginning to move toward the inside of self
rather than staying with our present reality.]
Exploring the contrast of Beth’s internal working model to our present-moment
experience. Here although Beth can articulate the new experience with me, she is
hesitant to let herself believe what she sees. Inside are layers of protectiveness that
cover profound hurt. The fact that we have built a secure base between us allows her
to have enough trust to continue exploring with me. I hold that she does see I am
truly here and wanting to know, even though that’s hard to trust. The next
intervention is a bit of both—I acknowledge her difficulty trusting, while also asking
her to notice if she can let in some of what she sees.
TH: It’s hard for you to trust. (hand motioning inside) How far in can that go? [I go
with the receptivity that emerges when she named “My eyes tell me you
are truly here.”]
PT: (sigh) I think it can go in; I think if I can just relax . . .

TH: Try out how far in that can go . . . [I make it experiential.] Try relaxing, just
see how much you can take in.
PT: Yeah.
TH: Try to take in that I care about you, and I want to know you. [Sincere tone of
voice: emphasis on care and want.] What happens? Let’s take it slow and see
what happens this time.
PT: (deep breath)
TH: That’s a deep breath. [I am moment-to-moment tracking and reflecting
what I see to heighten her awareness of her breath.]
PT: There’s something that really is—it’s like a block. It’s like it doesn’t just sink in.
[Here she is describing what she encounters from her observing self-at-
best.]
TH: Do you know where that block comes from?
PT: Um, um
TH: See if you can see . . . where that block comes from. [I want to know if she
can she make the link.]
PT: I think it just comes from being disappointed in the past—so just like “Don’t do
that again!” (Spoken in a very harsh tone with a look of warning in her eyes, and
her arm makes a sharp downward gesture)
TH: Right (I mirror her gesture, which shows a firm marking of a boundary between
self and other) [Affirming that I hear the message, I communicate that I
am right here with her.]
PT: DON’T do that. (strong emphasis on “don’t”)
TH: DON’T. (echoes the harsh tone) [I join her, resonating with the tone of her
voice.]
PT: DON’T let that in again.
TH: DON’T. (repeats mirroring hand gesture—she is nodding) That’s it . . .
[Validating and amplifying her protective expression in reaction to her
internal working model that expects rejection.]
PT: Don’t be stupid. Don’t (hand firmly presses her leg now) you know? Don’t believe
that somebody is really interested in you. [Defense against relatedness.]
TH: Ohhh. (big sigh) How painful, right, to believe and be disappointed . . . that
makes good sense—that you wouldn’t let in what’s here—cuz of the past
disappointments. [Explicit empathy with her need for the defense.]
Having our secure base, with the patient’s self-at-best online, provides a foundation
for the emergence and exploration of harsh messages from the patient’s self-at-worst.
In this vivid example, Beth courageously names and speaks the harsh messages that
drive her avoidant defenses. Hearing the intensity of such a prohibition brings
understanding to how the patient’s perception of safety can shift in an instant. And
yet, having enough self-at-best online, and having the history of our experiential work
together over the past year, Beth can inhabit the immensity of what lies under her
relational defenses. Such an example of the way having a secure base between

therapist and patient allows the exploration of scary places that usually would
manifest in shutting-down and withdrawal behaviors.
PT: Yeah (cries a bit)
TH: Just let that through—see what that’s like to recognize . . . Stay with me, what are
you getting? What’s happening?
PT: (sniffs, looking down and away) [Avoiding eye contact.]
TH: How do you feel right now as you are noticing this? [Checking in with her, I
am also assessing her window of tolerance.]
PT: Um (nodding), I think a lot. It’s so hard for me to go into my feelings cuz I think a
lot . . . [Increased self-awareness of her defense.]
TH: Stay with me—together we can help sort this out. [I encourage her to stretch
her window of tolerance, offering help from the position of older, wiser
other who trusts the process we are in.]
PT: I’ve always been self-sufficient, didn’t need anybody, developed my own thoughts.
Even turned away a lot of relationships, you know, don’t get too close . . . [Click of
recognition . . . describes the cost of the avoidant pattern, which this
process is helping her to notice. With increasing reflective capacity, she
may start to reconsider her options.]
Change begins with recognizing the cost of the defense was turning away from
relationships. With a new experience of exploring what is occurring in the here-and-
now experience with me, Beth identifies the implicit memory that drives her relational
patterning and isolation. She grows to recognize when she is thinking instead of
feeling and labels this accurately as defense. As affective experience emerges and she
begins to cry, she looks down and away, defending against her anticipation of
rejection. Yet she does stay present to notice what is emerging, which is a signal that
her trust in the process with me is growing. Her comment about not needing anybody
is a reflection upon her admonition to herself, which marks another step toward self-
understanding, as she identifies her pattern of self-reliance. Beth begins to identify
that she has lost a lot of relationships by this turning away, naming the cost of her
defensive protection, which is an important step in reorienting toward what she may
want at this point in her life.
Anxiety Corner on the Avoidant TOE
In terms of anxiety, avoidantly attached patients are not typically viewed as being on
the anxious side but rather more on the defensive side. And yet, as you can see in the
illustration in Figure 8.1, there is clearly anxiety about getting close, especially when
Beth has been close to the memory of her early longing for connection with her
father. Having a lens into the anxiety underneath avoidant defenses provides more
leverage for gaining traction in treatment. Those children in the Strange Situation who
present as avoidant are the ones who turn away from their departing parent and play
on their own without seeming to notice the leaving and return of their parent. While

the child appears unaffected, and even well-adjusted, when measures of cortisol are
taken, the child is revealed to be experiencing much anxiety. It is common to label
insecurely attached folks as having either “avoidant” or “anxious” attachment. Those
labels suggest that someone who appears avoidant is not anxious, or as anxious.
Nothing could be further from the truth. What’s at issue here is the way the individual
copes with anxiety in relation to the attachment system.
Deactivating the attachment system turns down anxiety. I find this very significant.
The anxiety corner of the TOE is also the location for inhibiting and signal affects.
Considering that avoidant behavior is a move away from anticipation of rejection by
an Other, or from the felt experience of needing an Other or from the feared
overwhelm of an unwanted emotion, we see inhibition in action. In response to
arousal, the avoidant pattern is deactivating, which literally turns down or turns off
awareness of emotion and/or relational needs. When the patient in the vignette
begins to show signs of emotion, she looks down and away. For her, worse than being
alone with her feelings was her fear of seeing disdain on my face. She managed this
anxiety by turning her head. It is vital that therapists recognize that apparent low
anxiety is a signal to explore, to help regulate or titrate, and to build inroads that can
scaffold the development of approach behaviors.
Markers of deactivation and apparent low anxiety. Markers of deactivation and
apparent low anxiety appear in subtle and not-so-subtle forms. Some patients take a
“relaxed posture,” which looks like slumping into the couch or chair. Others may sit
with arms folded across their chest, holding on to their elbows. Some yawn,
interestingly, at the precise moment a bid for relational contact comes up. These and
other behaviors may not be as they seem, at first. The patient may claim a lack of
sleep to explain yawning or rubbing their eyes. It is even more important then, to
notice the context in which this occurs, tracking moment-to-moment what is said and
the patient’s verbal and nonverbal response to it.
For instance, while folded arms or tightly crossed legs might appear as a “closed”
body posture, what if they are markers of how the patient is holding on to their self?
What if we see these gestures, from the movement channel, as signals of auto-
regulation? What if we perceive that in this response to their nervous system gearing
up, these discrete gestures are self-soothing? On a relational level this “moving away”
from the other is a move toward self-reliance and an overt expression of not-needing,
which was clearly articulated by my patient in the preceding example. In fact, the
implicit message might indeed signal the need for a calm, regulating influence, which
can cue psychotherapists to the unexpressed need for relational accompaniment. And
when the therapist attempts to offer some help in the form of regulation, the patient
may experience conflict. Such a place can stir a bit of crisis as patients drop down
toward core experiences at the bottom of the TOE, sensing vulnerability as their
avoidant strategies aren’t working completely.

Develop the capacity for dyadic regulation to offset auto-regulation. So, when the
defenses let go and anxiety appears in the foreground, the need for a supportive and
guiding other becomes clearer. With a patient learning to let go of their pattern of
avoidance, it is precisely this moment when they might recognize that help is needed.
As a new terrain opens, one that brings a descent into the body, they may need help
distinguishing thoughts that come to mind from the direct experience of feelings in
their body. With the therapist’s help, they can learn to stay with emerging sensations
and feelings. Herein lies the potential for allowing the therapist to become someone
to lean on and even to allow to help, to build new possibilities about collaboration and
reworking negative expectancies about emotions and relatedness.
The TOE depicts the emotion regulatory patterns of patients that help us to orient
our experiential work. To map out what happens relationally, we can turn to AEDP’s
SOE triangle, which is a representational schema of the internal working model of our
patient in each moment. We can track what is occurring that harkens back to the
original relationship between the caregiver (Other) and the Self. We can also track
new ways of relating between the patient and the therapist or the patient and their
own Self that promotes a self-at-best version of relatedness. Since the relational
milieu is such an influential part of development, and the SOE triangle depicts the
gestalt of relationship and emotion, I introduce the SOE triangle first before
continuing to discuss the affective experience at the bottom of the TOE. For ease of
using this triangle I now refer to the caregiver as the Other.1
The SOE Triangle (With Embedded TOE): Avoidant
How we have taken in and internally represented the experiences of our caregivers
while growing up is depicted on the SOE triangle (see Figure 8.2). The SOE triangle
incorporates Rows 1, 2, and 8 from Grids 1 and 2: Row 1, caregiver state of mind;
Row 2, caregiver hallmarks (behavior; see Chapter 5, pp. 154–156); and Row 8,
affective competence (Chapter 5, pp. 161–162). The impacts of the caregiver’s state
of mind and hallmark behaviors affect how the individual comes to internally
represent their Self and how they internally represent the Other on the SOE triangle.
Affective competence refers to how a person processes emotions, which is the
individual’s internalized representation of emotion on the SOE triangle. How the Other
meets a person’s (Self’s) Emotion determines how safe or threatened the Self feels to
experience their attachment needs or emotion. When an attachment longing or an
emotion is met with rejection or judgment, the Self learns that “I am not safe feeling
what I feel.” Or the Self develops an admonition like we saw in the above case
example: “Don’t be stupid. Don’t believe that somebody is really interested in you.”
When the other has a dismissive state of mind, their humiliating, rejecting, or
intrusive behaviors provoke the Self to disconnect from their somatic experience. The
Self shuts down their access to Emotion to protect the Self from feeling excruciating
despair and/or disintegration. The Self withdraws from the Other to avoid the person
who hurts them, which protects the relationship to survive, keeping the Self as intact

as possible. The Self’s representation of self may be “I am unlovable” or “I’m
unworthy.”
These repeated experiences form the person’s internal working model, which is
depicted on the SOE triangle. An example of the avoidant constellation of the self-at-
worst version of the SOE triangle is the individual’s representation of their
compromised Self as avoidant/unlovable and the individual’s internal representation of
the triggering Other as dismissive/rejecting. The individual’s representation of motion
is characterized as unacceptable: blocked or detached; their affective competence is
characterized by dealing, but not feeling.
One of the ways we discover what is driving the SOE template is by listening to
what the patient shares as negative thoughts or beliefs (defenses) that disconnect
them from affective experiences regarding themselves or their emotions. These
thoughts often reveal expectancies derived from early and repeated experiences with
the Other that have become internally represented. Expectancies contain the
dismissing messages of the Other or the anticipated experiences that have laid down
the tracks for internal working models to form. Some examples of self-at-worst
expectancies include “I’m unlovable,” “Something is wrong with me,” and “I am not
enough.” These beliefs become the fodder to challenge in treatment, when we have
enough self-at-best online, for the patient to hold this negative belief right next to
what is happening in the here-and-now of the therapist–patient relationship (as
evidenced by the above case illustration; Clinical Vignette 8B, Part 1).


Figure 8.2 The Self–Other–Emotion Triangle (With Embedded Triangle of Experience): Avoidant
Pando-Mars, 2024, adapted from Fosha, 2020
Exploring negative beliefs can open doors to early traumatic memories. Expectancies
are doorways into unresolved trauma and specific memories that need to be
processed for healing to occur. The negative belief that emerges in the moment can
lead to parts of us that have been hurt, holding on to painful introjects, and to the
people who have been causal. Each person’s internal working model shifts by
relationship and even by emotion. Some emotions are safer to feel in the eyes of
Others. Flexibility in our human condition arises as our perceptive survival instincts
discern what saves, what soothes, and what stirs. Such flexibility is paramount to
what makes psychotherapy and transformation possible. When psychotherapists can
meet the patient (self) and their emotion with attunement and resonance, we help
them have a new experience in the therapeutic relationship and differentiate from
what occurred in their history that is represented in their self-at-worst SOE triangle.
Thus, a new self-at-best constellation of the SOE triangle becomes possible, giving
rise to a new internal representation of self as effective, an internal representation of
the other as realistic, and emotion as able to be processed in a regulated way.
One of the goals of treatment is to shift the self-at-worst versions of the triangles,
which are activated by states of dread and engage the use of defenses, to self-at-best
versions of the triangles that are motivated by hope and openness to participate in
emotional and relational experience. In AEDP we employ the therapist stance to
explicitly provide a nutritive experience that strengthens the possibility of access to
Self while being with an Other in ways that enliven and engage the relational field.
When our patient has difficulty receiving our care, we can bring an exploration into
the present moment between us and ask the patient how they see us. “As you look at
me, what do you see in my eyes?” is an intervention that has the potential to
challenge the patient’s thought of being judged by focusing on what they perceive in
the moment. Our aim is for the moment-to-moment discoveries in our sessions to
strengthen and fortify the therapeutic relationship to allow for authentic sharing that
gets to an honest exchange in the here-and-now These exchanges open doorways
into differentiating what is unresolved from the past, while having a new experience
of the relationship with the therapist in the present.
Discussion of Clinical Vignette 8B Through the Lens of the SOE Triangle
As we see in the above vignette, when the therapist has built enough foundation with
the patient, we may be surprised by what is revealed. Viewing the other corner of the
SOE triangle, the patient is able to perceive the therapist’s care (seeing other
realistically), so in this moment the Self is effective, which puts us in a self-at-best
constellation. However, exploring the present moment-to-moment experience
between us also unearthed the patient’s harsh admonition, warning her about the
threat of disappointment (which came from the past triggering other, a self-at-worst
constellation). The patient’s anticipation of rejection and humiliation gave rise to

increased anxiety. The patient’s best effort to protect herself was with a relational
defense, to stand by her disbelief that someone would care or be there for her. When
this material surfaces in the experience between patient and therapist, we are close to
the moment of historical wounding, and we are on the brink of having a new
relational or emotional experience. There is a juxtaposition: When the past and the
present converge this is key to memory reconsolidation (Ecker et al., 2012). The
experience of looking into my eyes invited the patient to shift the impact of the
memory on her nervous system. Seeing and receiving my caring attention enabled her
to feel calm and juxtaposed the historical experience of rejection with a present
experience of acceptance and accompaniment. As much as dread was driving the
patient’s self-at-worst prohibition against opening and believing that anyone would
care, some hope emerged by experiencing our relatedness through her self-at-best
constellation, which permitted her to unburden the weight of prohibitions and
isolation to receive a new experience.
This moment of meeting provided the patient, Beth, with an opportunity to
recognize that the origins of her relational heartbreak had become misrepresented
internally as “something wrong with self.” Misattributions are a best strategy to avoid
fresh hurt of something that happened in the past: rejection and disappointment that
brought deep sadness and then aloneness. By giving the memory to its right place in
the past, the patient can free up space to have a new experience in the present. New
experiences with the therapist provide material for building new positive expectancies,
in which trust can be tried and tested, thus reviving the patient’s capacity for trusting
self and other in relationship.
Emotion and Relatedness at the Bottom of the TOE, at the Bottom of the SOE Triangle
At the bottom of the TOE there can be maladaptive or adaptive core affective
experiences. When treating avoidant strategies, the pathway to healing often involves
the unveiling and addressing of relational/attachment wounds that cut to the core and
then manifest in maladaptive experiences that need transforming. For instance, in
working with someone who has employed avoidant strategies to survive, the lessening
of defenses can give way to extreme vulnerability and fear of becoming overwhelmed
by the emotion that has been so desperately and consistently warded off, sometimes
for decades. Shame often encapsulates such vulnerability as the idea of being seen by
another person (remember the caregiver hallmarks of those who display an avoidant
pattern) brings with it an excruciating feeling of exposure that is near to, if not, totally
unbearable. This is the very state that needs to be transformed for the buried trauma
to be revealed.
Some individuals with an avoidant attachment strategy have experienced extreme
levels of intrusiveness—for example, perhaps when the attachment figure’s gaze
moves beyond a loving presence into a grasping stare, eyes that penetrate too much
or have a devouring nature. Another aspect of intrusiveness can be inferred from
Ainsworth’s Cooperation vs. Interference scale, in which the most interfering mothers
don’t see the baby as a separate person. There is a quality of arbitrariness to their

behavior with their babies: the use of direct or forceful physical interference or the
sheer number of interruptions. In the highly interfering category, caregivers seem to
assume the baby is theirs, with no regard for the baby’s wishes, mood, or activities
(Ainsworth et al., 1978/2015). Adults who have suffered with this kind of dismissive
state of mind from their caregivers, who are not seen to exist as a separate person,
often have disgust as a core emotion that needs processing and integration.
Foster adaptive vulnerability in place of avoidance. In processing early traumatic
memory and the related core emotions a new relationship to vulnerability is needed.
Adaptive vulnerability is one that is held in relationship with another, being willing to
bear visibility and even accompaniment while allowing previously avoided experience
to surface. Here, we value the patient’s connecting with their relational-affective
experiences, specifically allowing their authentic self-expression in the presence of an
Other. As patients share authentically and are received for their genuine expressions
with kindness and care, the psychotherapist fosters a new experience of
companionship. Growing the capacity for coordinated relational experiences with a
trusted Other means identifying the experience of attunement, noticing minor and
major disruptions, and working toward repair rather than shutting down. While the
patient and therapist together hold the unbearable fear of exposure, their connection
can contain the maladaptive affect, undoing aloneness with care and safety, thus
growing the capacity to expand in the face of constriction.
The banished self was not the result of an intrinsic tarnished proof of the self’s
unworthiness. Undoing aloneness may generate realizations of unmet attachment
longings, the remembering of specific moments in one’s early history, and the
processing of the emotions that have been held offline through defensive maneuvers.
Herein lies the potential for corrective self, relational, and emotional experiences to
bring about true adaptive action that arises in the wake of full emotional processing.
Beginning with facing and transforming impoverishment in the realm of relationships
with an Other brings deep relief that the banished self was not the result of some
intrinsic tarnished proof of the self’s unworthiness. Rather, the patient can begin to
take in a new experience of being worthy in the eyes of an Other, which reverberates
in the own Self’s recognition of deserving that is primal and human and endowed as a
birthright. First in the therapeutic relationship, as the therapist shows up as a reliable
other on whom the patient can count and lean on, the patient can begin to allow
contact with an Other and connection with their emotional life. Here the patient
increases their capacity to feel for their own Self with care and compassion, and
thereby can discover their capacity to empathize with others.
Connection to self is essential in building the capacity for relatedness with others.
Helping the person who relied on an avoidant strategy to build connection first and
foremost to self, starts with acceptance that there is worthy information to be found
by listening to inner stirrings and receiving the attention and accompaniment of a
trustworthy Other. Developing this capacity to relate to Self, building the capacity to

relate to an Other, and releasing relational action tendencies are pivotal goals of
treatment to heal avoidant strategies and move toward earned secure attachment. To
illustrate this representation, the TOE is embedded within the SOE triangle. At the
bottom of the SOE triangle the State 2 work of processing affective experiences to
completion takes place, which includes both relatedness and emotion.
Befriending Vulnerability and Relatedness, Recognizing Core Values, Building Trust
Making use of the therapist provides an opportunity for the patient to be in
relationship and build trust with an Other upon whom they can lean and can build a
stable sense of security supporting the patient to relate to themselves or to others in
new ways. Learning how to be with and receive the therapist’s accompanying and
caring presence and seeing themselves through kind and caring eyes can help the
individual with avoidant patterning shift how they relate to attachment needs and
experiences, and begin to build relational action tendencies.
The capacity for opening with another deepens: taking risks to share what isn’t
fully formed, being able to take in help, even ask for help, and not “going it alone.” By
receiving empathy, the capacity to empathize with another can grow. Some of the
interventions that cultivate relational adaptive action are helping the patient to
develop receptive affective capacity, allowing themselves to receive care, help, and
empathy. Receiving the therapist’s presence and accompaniment is needed to undo
the unbearable aloneness that resides deeply inside from the impact of being
rejected, dismissed, and objectified. When the patient is feeling seen and felt by the
therapist, they grow their capacity to connect to themselves. To be connected to
another, one must be connected to self.
Clinical Vignette 8B, Part 2: Accessing Emotion and Beginning to Identify
Autobiographical Narrative
In the first section of the psychotherapy session with Beth, we saw that what lurked
underneath the relational defense is huge fear of disappointment. The longing toward
relating with another is wired together with a defensive warning against believing that
another could truly be there. With the potential of letting in my care and interest,
feelings emerge that register the pain and the loneliness of past disappointments and
hurt. In Vignette 8B, as I help Beth tune into her own internal world of thought,
feeling, and customary behaviors, her capacity to reflect on both her longing and
dread opens. Such unfurling brings us to an adaptive action that translates into
newfound curiosity with more space for understanding rather than reactivity. In this
moment, revealing herself with the therapist as a collaborative other is growing,
BETH (PATIENT, PT): I try to get myself to figure out what I’m feeling. [Transformance
glimmer]
THERAPIST (TH): Good! [Affirmation]

PT: I always feel like “Don’t set yourself up for disappointment”; I just come back to
that over and over.
TH: Right, so (points to her head) you learned that that is hardwired in you, right?
PT: (nodding)
TH: That was your motto as a kid, and something today—What if you put that right
next [to each other] (shows both hands)? “Don’t set yourself up for
disappointment” and “What have we been working with today?” What do you get if
you put them together? [Reflecting with a tone of collaboration and
exploration, to separate the past messages from the present experience
with the therapist, then metaprocessing what is seen.]
PT: (big sigh) That’s a tough one. Because I want to believe that I can trust you, and
other people, that they can give me what I need, but that’s just not there (chokes
up).
TH: You know what’s there? There’s feelings . . . (gently noticing) that still need to
come out because the thing is they’re getting in the way . . . of your taking this
[new experience of trusting me] in . . . [I stay with her emerging emotion
and lend my trust that if feelings are emerging, they deserve to be felt.]
PT: (nodding)
TH: Your feelings are really about all that hurt. [I am speaking gently and kindly,
as the older, wiser attachment figure, who identifies her feelings with
understanding and acceptance.] What’s happening right now?
PT: It’s a grief that makes me sad that I can’t get that in my life. It makes me sad; it
makes me . . . [Now she puts words to her feelings, yet she describes an
expectancy based on her past.]
TH: The grief is about you couldn’t get that in your life, you didn’t get that in your life
. . . from the person that you wanted it with, so this is that little girl in you who just
couldn’t get what you needed . . . [Empathic elaboration, differentiating what
happened in the past from her anticipation of what is possible in her life.]
PT: (looking down and away)
TH: Stay with me, what are you feeling? Stay with this. [Encouraging her to be
present with me.]
PT: You know it’s hard because when I was a kid to need my dad or my mom in my
family was just considered horrible; What’s wrong with you? [She registers the
significant events of her early life experience that influence her prevalent
attitude about her current life, now stirred by what is happening with
me.]
TH: So, come here for a second, I want to check in with you. How is it to be here with
me? [The deactivating strategy pulls at her. I see she is slipping out of the
present with me and sinking into shame.]
PT: (stays in eye contact)
TH: I feel like I so want to go with you to these places. [Therapist’s explicit use of
self to undo aloneness and counter the old experience.]
PT: (gaze averts and looks around)
TH: Because you don’t have to feel alone. [Making the implicit explicit]

PT: I don’t feel alone.
TH: Really?
PT: I really feel like you’re right there with me . . . I really do. [I must admit this
feels like a surprise and a relief.]
Sort out what happened in the past from what is happening in the present. Step-by-
step, working at the edge of the window of tolerance, at the edge of what is expected
and what is new, we forge ahead. As Beth began to consider that she may trust me,
she feels grief about the lack of trustworthy others in her life. Anxiety emerges,
revealing her internal working model that is fixed in that she looks to the future with
her model of the past. My stating that this is what happened in her past, distinct from
here-and-now raises the contrast with her parents, and marks the beginning of
differentiating what happened in the past from what is happening now and is new in
the present relationship with me.
Sometimes in sessions where there is a significant breakthrough, another entry
point appears that we can engage with a deepened spirit of collaboration. One of
these moments appeared in the next few minutes following the above exchange. Beth
began speaking about how she was on her own as a child, yet she saw herself as
fiercely independent. I was able to ask if we could take some accompaniment back to
the little girl in her. She said yes and opened a doorway into an imaginal world that
she once occupied alone.
Establishing safety: entering through the imaginal channel. Beth invites me to join her
in the fields of her childhood. She imagines that I take her hand and walk alongside
her through the familiar terrain she explored as a young girl. She playfully points to
the big rabbits that are leaping through the tall grasses, and I respond as if talking to
a 5-year old: “The jackrabbits are hopping.” I narrate in a sweet voice. I feel as if I
am leaning down to the level of a child, with tenderness and care. We are
constructing a more trusting relationship by meeting in this imaginal world, a place
that was safe back then, and seems like a transitional space we can occupy together
now. I am deeply moved to be allowed inside her precious world as a trusted
companion, and naturally offer company and witnessing that had been sorely missing.
In this realm, I can see that sharing an imaginal space feels safer than sharing
emotions. Emotions had been ridiculed and a source of unsafety as child, where her
imaginal channel was an escape and a place of refuge. To join her in her safe place
was an important meeting ground for deepening trust in our work together.
Getting to the Roots of Attachment Trauma: The Triangle of
Relational Comparisons
(See Chapter 3, Figure 3.4, p. 114)

Bringing nutritive experiences to the little ones inside our adult patients is one
corrective element of healing: opening new possibilities, shifting old expectations.
Making connections between wounding from the patient’s past historical relationships
and the challenges they find in current relationships is key to healing repetitive
patterns that arise from attachment trauma. The triangle of relational comparisons
(TORC) is the AEDP representational schema that helps psychotherapists to map out
both what is repetitive and what is corrective in the patient’s journey. The TOE and
the SOE triangle are embedded in each corner of the TORC. The upper left corner
holds the current relationship(s). The upper right corner holds the therapeutic
relationship, and the bottom corner holds past relationships. (See Chapter 3, pp. 113–
115, for a fuller explanation.)
Entering the dark and troubling waters of relationships and being with previously
avoided emotions with a trusted psychotherapist helps patients to awaken hidden
potentials. Our patients surprise themselves when these new potentials help to clarify
what was puzzling and worrisome. They come to realize how to make use of their
emotions, and how to share them. They can generalize new experiences of valuing
emotional expression, inspiring new levels of communication in significant
relationships, which opens possibilities for true exchange. When our patients shift
avoidant patterns and learn to express their feelings—indeed, we are filling in for
developmental lapses and restoring access to their core self.
In the following section I continue with the psychotherapy session of Vignette 8A,
in which I am working with Gayle’s defenses against emotion, stemming from
avoidant patterns that impact her marriage. Her presenting issue was difficulty being
close with her husband. She described avoidant patterns of relating, discomfort with
affection, and heightened sensitivity at times of his planned departures.
Gayle has come to treatment to explore this pattern that seems to contradict the
love she has for her husband. I believe her wish to address these conflicts is
demonstrative of her care. This session begins with Gayle talking about her reaction
to her husband going out of town, claiming “I really don’t care.” Engaging her with a
kind and receptive presence, I intervene right away. I counter her relational defense
with what I sense is her transformance striving. I say that I believe she does care.
Tracing the unfolding process with the patient on the TOE and the SOE triangle
helps to organize the multiple layers of process, while also guiding a clear course of
clinical action. Via the TOE, we map out how the patient moves away from emotion
(defense) or feeling anxious. On the TORC, in the corner of therapeutic relationship, I
occupy the place of other, one who is helpful and facilitating, rather than oblivious to
Gayle’s experience as were her attachment figures. With my attention, the patient
learns to identify for herself when she is avoiding feelings by going into her thoughts.
When she is feeling anxious, we slow down to tune into what is stirred. My
engagement replaces the need for her defenses. I consistently affirm each of her
steps toward emotion and ask her to repeat affect-laden words to feel into them with
intention. Feeling into thoughts is an intervention from Grid 3, Row 7: this helps our
patients with avoidant patterning to become more aware of their emotions to develop
affective competence.

Our collaboration allows us to explore what happens in the current dynamic with
Gayle’s husband, represented on the upper left corner of the TORC. The way I am
with her, as her therapist, is represented on the upper right corner. I encourage Gayle
to face what is stirring, and unresolved from her historical past, which is represented
at the bottom of the TORC. Once she has a new experience of feeling the unfelt
emotion from earlier in her life, she starts to put the pieces together, and at the end
of the session there is a shift in how she can imagine relating with her husband.
Note that the experiences represented at the top of the TOE (i.e., defenses and
anxiety) are State 1 phenomena in the Four-State Map of the Transformational
Process (see Chapter 2 on AEDP, for a full description) and experiences represented at
the bottom of the TOE (i.e., emotions and other core affective phenomena) are State
2 phenomena. State 3 and State 4 phenomena are only represented in the Four-State
Map of the Transformational Process and thus were not part of the three
representational schemas discussed above.
Clinical Vignette 8A, Part 2: “I Don’t Care” Heralds the Emergence of “I Would Be
Devastated”
GAYLE (PATIENT, PT): I really don’t care—but implicit in your partner going out of town .
. . if he’s just going to have fun . . . I don’t really care. [State 1: defenses in
operation]
THERAPIST (TH): But you do care. [Pressuring with empathy by leaning into what
is really at the bottom of the TOE. I am a welcoming other inviting her
genuine feeling, which is a self-at-best version of other on the SOE
triangle.]
PT: I shell up. I get really defensive I suppose. [She demonstrates self-reflection
by naming her defense.] I don’t think intellectually that he’s abandoning me, but
I have this whole process that I go through intellectually where I get mad at him.
TH: Let’s just take a minute and be . . . and feel into what you’re saying . . . [Asking
her to “feel into her thoughts” builds connection to the underlying
experience.]
PT: (nodding)
TH: “Every time he leaves [I repeat her words, to amplify the pattern] I get
mad” (hand down on core) and I see . . . sadness.
PT: I want to be able to say to him, I could, but I can’t, that I’m not mad. I just feel
like he’s abandoning me, but that sounds so ridiculous.
TH: Can we slow down . . . when you say, “I feel like he’s abandoning me . . .” What’s
the feeling? [The patient projected her feeling as what he is doing, and she
leaves the present moment with me.] Can you just say the feeling if you don’t
put the words to it? Before you even say it, feel. Let’s just be with the feeling more.
[I refocus her on the experience under her thoughts by inviting her back
into what she is feeling.]
PT: I feel tight, hot. I get short with my kids. [She responds with sensation at
first, then gets distracted by thinking about a pattern with her kids.]

TH: Slow down. Feeling tight and hot right now? [I repeat the sensations she
names to redirect her attention to what is happening in her body right
now.]
PT: (nodding)
TH: Sounds like anxiety. [I label the experience for her, which maps on to the
TOE.]
PT: Mm-hmm.
TH: Sounds like a reaction to the feeling . . . So, can you just see if you could let
yourself be with the tightness, be with the heat? [I want her to tune into the
anxiety . . . so that both of us can be present, which is a new way of being
with herself, and is also a new relational experience.]
PT: (she breathes and stays in contact with me) [Together, we regulate the
anxiety.]
TH: See if you can go back just a little bit and see if we can touch into that emotion
that’s nearby. [Guiding her attention to what was occurring right before the
anxiety kicked in.]
PT: It’s hard because I just think I am so used to it. [She reflects the fixed
patterning.] I just can’t even pinpoint how it is . . . that I feel.
TH: Mm-hmm.
Distinguish thoughts from body-based feelings to get to the core affect. During the
next few minutes we move toward and away from the core affective experience. I
help the patient distinguish thoughts from feelings and how to understand her
process by mapping it on the TOE. When I realize she has shed some tears, I wonder
if she experiences a felt shift that she can identify and leverage to build some trust
that she can tolerate emotion.
TH: How do you feel as you have these tears? [Metaprocess the new experience.]
Can you feel what it’s like in your body to let yourself have some tears?
PT: (settles in and breathes)
TH: It’s good to breathe too. [Affirm]
PT: It feels like a release a little bit . . . it feels like I’m calming . . . [This is a
postbreakthrough affect, marking a shift that happens after she let
herself experience some emotion.]
TH: So, tune into that. Let yourself just feel calming. Feel release. Just notice.
Experience each shift to gain traction. Before going for more—I invite the patient to
experience the shift that occurred, which helps her to perceive the shift and
strengthens her awareness of what is happening in her body, not just her thoughts.
Change gets traction. Staying with the shift allows a natural deepening to unfold.
TH: Be with that. What’s that like for you?
PT: (quiet)

TH: What do you notice?
PT: I just feel sad. [And now she simply acknowledges the experience of
emotion.]
TH: Okay. Let’s just give that a lot of room. Give yourself room to feel sad. It takes a
lot so I just appreciate your willingness. [Stay, deepen, affirm—explicitly
guiding her to be with what is unfolding.]
To surrender to just feeling sad is a big step for this patient, to arrive at the simple
truth of her emotional experience. We landed here by the careful moment-to-moment
tracking of the emergence of Gayle’s affective experience and my pointing out her
moving away by thinking and trying to figure things out. By first helping her to notice
her tears, and then identifying the pattern by mapping out her anxiety and defense on
the TOE, she became capable to drop down into her felt sense of feeling sad.
In the following segment, I continue to offer my presence as an accompanying
Other, resonating with her experience while also leaning into affective moments. I
narrate the process at times to reflect what is happening to help her to stay with the
new space she is giving herself that allows old emotions to surface. I select affect-
laden words that I ask her to repeat to attune to what is emerging. Having her repeat
significant words helps to intensify her connection to self.
State 2 Work
Over the next minute the client shares more about what happens with her husband
and gets to an important realization, which I have her repeat.
TH: Okay, slow down. Just let yourself very slowly say, “I’m scared for him to leave.”
[Repeat affect-laden words to amplify.]
PT: I’m scared for him to leave.
Repeat affect-laden words. Having Gayle repeat this brings up intense feeling and
then defense as she moves toward and away from the experience. We stay with the
emergent process over a few minutes, holding the focus.
TH: You’re scared for him to leave. [Staying very close, repeating her words.]
PT: (shrugs left shoulder) It brings back old feelings, I think.
TH: Okay (nodding), good for you . . . just good for you, good for you. (deep exhale)
[Again, there is a dropping down through another layer and I affirm her
awareness and repeat her words to emphasize their importance.]
TH: “I’m scared for him to leave.” [Reflecting her words, validating that they
point to the underlying material.] His leaving brings back old feelings . . . mm-
hmm . . . that’s a lot to say out loud.
PT: It feels like it is. [She agrees that this step is significant.]
TH: I think so too. Good for you. [Affirmation]

PT: Thank you. (nodding with a very sweet and tender look into my eyes)
Affirm each movement toward emotion. We are beginning to approach old feelings
that come from a state that occurred when she was young. Notice how often I affirm
each movement toward emotion. While this is attuned to her, which we know by her
receptivity to my acknowledging her, it is important that psychotherapists titrate such
affirmation with each patient to what serves each dyad.
As we deepen into State 2 core affective experiences, anxiety and defense rise, as
the avoidant patterning kicks in. But with me, Gayle doesn’t have to rely on her
defenses to protect herself from anxiety about what feels so big and overwhelming. I
step in quickly to regulate her anxiety about being alone and use affirmations to
steady her growing awareness. We approach the previously warded-off experience. By
staying with what emerges, collecting the pieces of what she knows, and being with
them together, we gain more access to what she doesn’t know. When she uses the
word “devastated” to describe what she imagines she would feel if her husband left, I
recognize this affect-laden word is probably a link to historical material. Here we can
map the process on to the TORC, for the opportunity to recognize and link past and
current experiences.
State 2 Phenomena: Emergence of Core Affect—Linking Current Experience to Its
Historical Past
TH: What kind of vulnerability do you feel when he goes out of town? [We explore
her anxiety to regulate it, which reemerges as we get closer to historical
material.]
PT: I don’t know . . . I know I would be devastated [powerful affect-laden word] if
he didn’t come back. And maybe . . . clearly, it’s some subconscious level.
[Emergent realization] I don’t actually think he’s not going to come back but on
some level I think while he’s gone I’m vulnerable. What if he didn’t come back?
[New felt sense] I’ve never thought about this, but he is the only man, after my
dad, who I’ve ever loved this much. And my dad left . . . and if my husband leaves
too that would be . . . (wiping eyes) [Click of recognition . . . she makes the
association between fear that emerges when her husband leaves to the
moment when her father did leave.]
TH: Ooh . . . just let yourself . . . [Empathy]
PT: I don’t think he’s going to, though . . . [Bargaining: transitional affect]
TH: Right . . . just to feel.
PT: But that’s the fear. [Realization of the old]
TH: That’s the fear. (she is nodding) [Validation] What if he leaves like Dad left . . .
so this fear sounds like it’s like Dad leaving . . . [Linking the current experience
with the past historical trauma: TORC.]
PT: I think it is . . . (wiping tears—head tilting)
TH: Okay . . . oh (gentle soothing tone of voice) it’s so important that we let yourself
really feel this . . . [Client breathes] That would account for some really old

feeling that didn’t get comforted . . . so courageous. [Affirming: linking a
current experience with a past fear.]
PT: Thank you. (blows nose)
TH: What vulnerability. [Affirming that she is allowing herself to experience her
emotion and the truth of her experience.]
PT: (nodding)
TH: And that really happened.
PT: That did happen.
TH: So, what you are afraid of with your husband did happen when your dad left . . .
[Names the overlay of historical material on current life experience.]
Link the current life experience to the past historical event. This is huge . . . the
emergent realization that Gayle’s current affective response with her husband fits
what she feared, which actually did occur with her father in her past.
Metaprocessing New Awareness Leads to State 3 Transformational Affects
PT: Ooh . . . (takes a deep breath)
TH: Take your time, let yourself be with yourself here . . . [Following her breath,
her lead]
PT: Thank you. [State 3 expression of feeling moved and expressing gratitude
for the realization.]
TH: What do you feel as you say this? What’s happening? [Metaprocessing the
shift]
PT: That’s an epiphany for me . . . it’s probably so obvious . . . but I just never felt it .
. . I never believed it.
TH: Feeling it makes all the difference . . . [Affirming what she did]
Undo unbearable aloneness. Gayle had disconnected from the memory of being alone
with unbearable experience. Making this connection put the past in perspective. She
experienced the deep realization that comes from body-based core emotion, which led
her into State 3 transformational affects: mastery, feeling moved, and realization.
Stay with transformational experience to promote integration. In the next segment, I
help Gayle saturate into her experience of knowing, which guides her realization
about what plays out with her husband that stems from the historical traumatic
departure of her dad. Staying with transformational experience harnesses
neuroplasticity and promotes integration.
TH: So just feel yourself feeling what you know . . . let yourself feel it, see it . . .
[Repeat to amplify and deepen.]
PT: Yeah . . . I am scared of that.
TH: Say it fully.

PT: I am scared that my husband would leave like my dad did . . . (stays with the
feeling)
TH: Yeah . . . yeah . . . [Affective resonance]
PT: (breathes, wipes eyes)
TH: Yeah.
PT: So, what do I do with that? The fear doesn’t go away, right? [She is asking for
my help.]
TH: Come here though . . . Let’s make room for the little girl whose dad left, and let
her not be so alone with that right now . . . Can we somehow let her come in and
really feel our care and desire to be with how devastating that is?
PT: Devastating . . . yeah . . .
TH: Yeah, can you see her, see yourself at that age? [Initiating a portrayal]
PT: I see a little girl who’s very sad . . . and trying to be brave.
TH: Yeah . . . yeah . . . Can we be with her in some way and say you don’t have to be
brave right now?
PT: (looks up)
TH: And actually, really let yourself feel so sad . . . and you don’t have to be alone
with it . . . That’s the thing because that little one had to be alone.
PT: Yeah. Definitely . . .
TH: So that’s part of what you’re up against right now . . .
PT: (sweet smile)
During the next few minutes, Gayle discovers what she would want to hear from her
husband, which seems just right for her younger self, to bring comfort and care that
had been sorely lacking.
State 2 Transformational Work: Connecting Self-to-Self Changes the SOE Triangle
Configuration From Self-at-Worst to Self-at-Best
TH: Can you picture that? Letting someone say that to her? Can you see if she can
receive that? “I have compassion for you and I’m so sorry that this happened to
you . . .” Give her a minute with this and take your time . . . [State 2:
intrarelational work with the intervention of a mini portrayal to bring a
corrective experience to the younger self.] What’s that like?
PT: I haven’t done that before . . . say something to her and she acknowledges that
she hears me. Before it’s just me telling her things, but that’s really nice . . . [From
self-at-worst being talked at, to self-at-best being seen and heard: This is
a corrective emotional and relational experience.]
TH: What’s nice? [Metaprocess the new experience.]
PT: To connect . . . to have her . . . she just looked up at me and smiled . . . [Self-to-
self connection; emotional transformation.]
TH: Ooh . . . Can you just drink in that looking up at you and smile?

Connect adult self with younger self. Here as Gayle connects with her younger self
and her underlying attachment needs, she opens further. In the self-at-best
configuration of the SOE triangle, through using her imaginal channel via the
portrayal, she sees her younger self and her younger self responds as seen. This
moment of meeting marks the moment of transformation: What was disconnected
and “left behind” is now real and brought into connection, further transforming the
past–current link on the TORC.
State 3: Transformational Affects
TH: That contact feels so necessary . . . [More affirmative reflection. Stay with,
deepen, and honor this new corrective experience.]
PT: It does . . .
TH: Just feels precious to me . . . [State 3 healing affects: feeling moved]
PT: It does . . . thank you very much. [State 3: gratitude]
TH: You’re welcome. What are you feeling thankful for right now? [Deepen and
elaborate.]
PT: I feel tremendous gratitude that you’re helping to guide me through this stuff.
[Elaborating State 3: feeling gratitude] This is a tremendous piece of it . . . I
think that if I have any issues in my marriage, this is the root of it. [State 4: core
state declarative truth sense emerges]
TH: Yup. I love that you can know and say that—think of how far you’ve come in
today’s session. [Making explicit and celebrating the bigness of the
change.]
PT: I know, it has!
TH: There’s avoiding the vulnerability and now being able to acknowledge the
connection between the fear of him going away . . .
PT: Or even just being intimate and letting my guard down. [More self-
understanding. State 4: core state and open to seeing the other
realistically and understanding herself better.]
TH: Um, yeah . . .
PT: I am prepared for him to leave, and I have done all the things for myself to
prepare for when it happens. Like I believe it’s a given that he is going to leave . . .
[State 4: declarative; the truth sense. She is speaking about the repetitive
experience in her marriage from a new, expanded place of self-
understanding, and from here she can recognize what is in her heart and
truly is hers to navigate.]
TH: So, let me just ask you: What do you want to say to your husband right now? [I
return to a concern she had raised earlier, to revisit this from the
platform of the new place.]
PT: That I’m sorry. I feel like I do this to him and then he leaves in a bad place feeling
guilty and upset—like I’m taking something from him. [Core state: As she
reflects, she shifts from the SOE triangle representation of self-at-worst—

compromised self—and now can perceive her husband from her SOE
triangle representation of self-at-best—realistic other.]
TH: Do you want to tell him what you’re sorry for? [Going for the specific
learning.]
PT: Not being able to articulate my feelings. [The stage is set for effective action
on behalf of herself—and shows here the potential corrective relational
experience between her and her husband.]
Summary. In this case illustration, I am focusing on helping this patient, Gayle, to
move through the avoidant patterning that developed by way of her caregiver’s
ignoring and thus rejecting signals of her affective experience. Her adaptation to this
way of relating by her parents created problems and strife in her marriage. The
moment of meeting that occurs between her adult self and her younger self ignites
the transformation of her internal working model. In the shock and devastation of her
parent’s divorce, her experience of being alone and unseen was encapsulated in her
psyche and remained unprocessed through her adaptive avoidant strategy and
defensive exclusion. When her adult self sees and offers compassion to her younger
self, she gives her exactly the care and attention that is needed. By the look her
younger self returns to the adult self, we know she receives it. The imaginal scene
that occurred through the use of a portrayal is profoundly corrective, transforming her
internal representations of self from “I am alone. No one sees me” into “I am seen,
precious, and understood.” The part of her that held her pain had been isolated and
out of focus. When the older, wiser self shows up with just the right message, the
younger self is grateful and welcoming of connection. In how Gayle reconnects with
her adult self, we see how the younger self is untarnished. This exemplifies how
under the right conditions, what is warded off in self-protection is available for
awakening and integration. With a changed internal representation of Self, the
internal representation of Other changes. The patient now sees her husband as
someone with whom she wants to reveal her true experience, for greater mutual
understanding and connection.
Healing Avoidant Attachment
Applying this vignette to the overall picture of healing avoidant attachment shows that
what is broken is not the self but connection to the self. What went wrong when the
individual was alone, suffering without recognition and attunement, can be repaired
by the step-by-step, explicit exploration of the experience of connection to self in
relationship with another. To heal the wounding that gives rise to avoidant patterning,
we help patients restore their capacity to be in relationship with self and other.
Establishing a capacity to tolerate vulnerability, their own and another’s, enhances
both the giving and receiving of responsive care. Through having corrective emotional
and relational experiences, and exploring the changes through metatherapeutic
processing, patients can transform their internalized representation of the self and

their internalized representation of the other. By doing so, relational adaptive action
comes to the fore.
Here are some of the main intervention pathways we showed in this chapter:
• Develop positive expectancies to offset the anticipation of rejection and
negativity
• Affirm qualities that demonstrate the patient’s core values
• Explore what happens in the present moment between therapist and patient
• Be on the lookout for therapist reactivities like feeling intimidated and
intellectualizing
• Notice opportunities to use therapist metaskills of kindness and acceptance
• Develop the capacity for dyadic regulation to offset auto-regulation
• Focus into affect-laden words
• Feel into thoughts
• Affirm glimmers of attachment strivings, connections, vulnerability, and empathy
• Build the capacity to connect with and relate to another
• Build receptive affective capacity
• Develop a connection to somatic experience
• Recognize own needs and the needs of others