9
The Formation of Ambivalent/Resistant
Attachment (Grid 2)
I want you, nothing else but you.
—ANONYMOUS
Ambivalence/Resistance & the Hyperactivating
Strategy
Ambivalent/resistant attachment is the inverse of avoidant
attachment—opposite sides of the same coin of insecurity. As we
continue to explore what happens when insecurity prevails in its
many forms, it’s important to remember that the origin of each
strategy often goes back through generations, and yet, patterns can
change according to the conditions of each current relationship.
Ambivalence arises out of the conflict between wanting and not
wanting. Resistance is the behavioral conflict between wanting and
pushing away. Ambivalence and resistance grow when our
attachment behavior (e.g., reaching for, crying, expressing need)
fails to attract the consistent and reliable attention and response of
our caregivers. The ambivalent/resistant pattern in children is
correlated with inconsistent caregivers who have a preoccupied state
of mind (Main et al., 1985) and are often excessively focused on
their own needs and their own attachment figures (which can
include both of their parents or their current primary partners), to
the detriment of their children.
A child’s attachment behavioral system is designed to attract the
caregiver, who, in best-case scenarios, draws upon their innate,
reciprocal caregiving behavioral system to provide the necessary

comfort and care. However, in the pattern of ambivalent/resistant
attachment, the caregiver’s behavior is inconsistent, resulting from
states of mind that are preoccupied and/or overwhelmed. These
caregivers are available at times when they can manage, and at
times when they are interested in caregiving, rather than in
consistent response to their infant’s signaling their need. When
reaching out doesn’t get the necessary or desired response, infants
adjust accordingly—in this case, developing the adaptive strategy of
keeping a close eye on their caregivers. Since they are not reliably
monitoring the infant’s signals, the infant monitors their caregiver’s
availability, so if they need them, the infant might be close enough
to have access to them at those moments of unexpected availability
(Cassidy, 2001; Main & Solomon, 1986). In this pattern the child is
more focused on the caregiver than the caregiver is focused on the
child.
Bretherton (2005) described the ambivalent/resistant pattern as
the infant taking on more than their share of the burden of
maintaining the connection. Attempting to reach a caregiver who is
sometimes loving and responsive and sometimes not, children often
rely on hyperactivating strategies: they exaggerate their distress,
heighten their reaching, and in general they keep their attachment
system on high alert. The farther away, distracted, and preoccupied
the caregiver is, the more dysregulated and “needy”1 the child may
become, urgently seeking to get the caregiver’s attention, clinging to
the hope of getting help and love, protesting the absence of
response and care.
The response of the attachment figure is based on their capacity
to attend, rather than sensitivity to what the infant needs at the time
the infant is in need. With a mind saturated by preoccupied thoughts
and worries, caregivers are often self-absorbed and not easily
accessible. Thus, infants have difficulty getting their caregivers’
attention and lose trust that they can attract the care they need.
When the caregiver does turn toward them, the infants are hard to
settle and have difficulty receiving soothing and comfort. It may be
that the arms that finally reach for them are less than adequate or

are ill timed or the infant’s capacity to receive is tainted, as repeated
disappointment and the risk of losing their attachment figure’s
attention is so great.
To understand how these patterns develop, we turn to the early
studies of caregiver–infant interactions. Since the individuals in
treatment with us are adults, the patterns we are working with tend
to have been in place for at least two decades and usually more. To
get a close picture of characteristic experiences that influence how
an ambivalent/resistant pattern of attachment forms, we look at
some of the depictions of babies and their mothers from the early
research. Learning what to see in our patients and how to imagine
what they experienced when they were infants and young children
can be informed by the impressions shaped by these studies.
Early Observations
In Mary Ainsworth’s (1967) early observations of babies in Uganda,
she categorized what we now understand as ambivalent/resistant
attachment as insecure attachment, in contrast to the babies who
exhibited secure attachment and distinct from those babies she
initially thought were nonattached (who we now call avoidant). With
her earliest criteria as frequency of crying, Ainsworth noted that the
“insecure” babies were fussier than the secure babies. Many of these
children’s mothers were troubled and anxious themselves. When
meeting to discuss their child-rearing practices, the mothers of the
“insecure” babies were often more interested in having someone to
talk to for themselves rather than talking about their babies.
In contrast, some of the mothers of secure babies were anxious,
yet their anxiety was often directly related to their children. They
were motivated to become involved in the Uganda study to learn
how to care for their child (Ainsworth, 1967). Demonstrating Fosha’s
(2000b) description of the secure pattern, these mothers of secure
babies were feeling and dealing, while relating. They dealt with their
anxiety about child-rearing by taking advantage of Ainsworth’s study.
The secure mothers were often seen delighting in their child and

enjoying the opportunity to talk about their child. Ainsworth
repeatedly observed that the onset of attachment corresponded with
the children taking initiative to connect with their mothers. The
secure children used their mothers as a base from which to explore
and sought her as a haven of safety when they were alarmed.
In the cases of babies she saw as insecure (i.e.,
ambivalent/resistant), Ainsworth (1967) noted how the mothers had
difficulty soothing them. She observed that “there seemed to be a
vicious spiral in which the babies’ fussy demands exasperated the
mother, who then overtly or covertly rejected the baby, who then in
turn responded to the rejection by anxiety and by increasing his
demands” (p. 392). She describes the crying and restlessness of one
of these babies, Suliamani:
He sat on his mother’s lap sometimes fussing, sometimes
merely vocalizing. Finally, he began to cry in earnest. The cry
turned into a tempery scream. His mother tried to soothe
him, talking to him, and rocking him. There was a perfunctory
quality to her soothing, and before long she slung him over
her back and rocked him there. This treatment did not quiet
him, however, so finally she gave him the breast—he
immediately stopped crying and began to suckle.
It appeared even by 25 weeks, that a tense and insecure
relationship has grown up between them. His mother had no
confidence in being able to soothe him and was made anxious by his
fussing. She did not offer him the breast every time he cried, and
yet she could find no other reliable method of quieting him (pp.
219–220).
In the Uganda study, Ainsworth observed how the child’s security
could change, for better or worse, depending on the conditions of
the home, familial relationships, and life circumstances (Ainsworth,
1967; Hesse & Main, 1999). In the case of Suliamani, when the
senior wife went away and his mother was much less stressed, he
appeared more secure. Even in the early observations, Ainsworth

tracked how attachment status changes not only by relationship but
by how each relationship is affected circumstantially according to
environmental conditions.
Baltimore Home Visits Correlated to the Strange Situation Procedure
In the Baltimore home observations, Ainsworth studied caregiver–
infant interactions to investigate the different characteristics of the
mother’s caregiving behaviors and how this influenced the baby’s
development of secure and insecure attachment. Babies exhibiting
patterns of resistance/ambivalence were seen to show more
separation distress at home and in the Strange Situation. At home
the babies seen as ambivalent/resistant were noted to cry more
frequently than the secure babies. The secure babies’ cries were
noticeably clearer and more varied, and they showed more subtle
forms of nonverbal communication than the other babies (Ainsworth
et al., 1978, p. 125).
Mothers2 of the ambivalent/resistant babies were observed to be
less responsive to crying and other signals the babies made to
express their needs. Although not rejecting like the group of mothers
of the avoidant babies, nor as compulsive or lacking in emotional
expression, these mothers were often lacking the fine sense of
timing in responding to their babies that was exhibited by mothers of
secure infants. They were seen as less comfortable holding their
babies; adding to the picture that their experience of close bodily
contact was not as consistently positive and pleasurable as the
contact experienced by the secure infants and mothers (Ainsworth et
al., 1978). In fact, one of Ainsworth’s (1967) findings was that the
mother’s enjoyment of holding her baby and nursing her baby was
central to the development of security.
Consequently, the babies classified as ambivalent/resistant lacked
confidence and ease with their mother’s accessibility and holding.
For instance, they would protest if their mother’s pickup was ill timed
(i.e., if she did not pick them up when they wanted to be picked up
or were put down when they wanted to be held or if she played with

them when they wanted to be picked up). Related to these
misattuned interactions, these babies became frustrated, showed
angry ambivalence manifesting in clinging behavior—yet slowness at
being soothed. They also were less likely to use their mothers as a
secure base from which to explore, which points to how these
babies’ initiative to learn about their surroundings was often
underdeveloped. That’s why Fosha (2000b) dubbed this style
“feeling and reeling” (i.e., these babies became frustrated, showed
angry ambivalence manifesting in clinging behaviors), “but not
dealing” (i.e., these babies’ initiative to learn about their
surroundings was often underdeveloped).
The mothers’ inconsistent responsiveness resulted in their babies
having more anxiety in their attachment with her. They protested
angrily when what they wanted wasn’t met. Some of them grew
passive. Ainsworth et al. (1978/2015) noted the discrepancy
between what the babies wanted and what they expected to receive
and keenly surmised that their anxiety was based on fearing that
“they will not get enough of what they want—in contrast to the
avoidant baby who fears what they want” (p. 128). When the
mother’s responsiveness to their baby is badly timed or insufficient,
the babies come to distrust the mother’s availability and reliability.
In the Baltimore home observations, the mother–infant dyadic
interactions were the focus of the study. In the Strange Situation,
the infant was the primary focus of observation about how they
responded to the stress of separation followed by reunion. Not
surprisingly, the ambivalent/resistant babies were distressed upon
the mother’s departure and did not settle when she returned. When
she picked them up, they sometimes squirmed uncomfortably in her
lap, resisting being held. Furthermore, when they were put down,
they continued to fuss and cling. If the mother pointed the child
toward toys, they did not engage. Main (2000) pronounced that
distress appears meaningless when, from the outset of the Strange
Situation, the child is distressed and continues to be so throughout
the separation and reunion scenarios. Sometimes the separation
episodes had to be cut short; yet again, even with the mother’s
return, the infant did not calm easily.

Similar to the insecure avoidant infant, Main saw the
ambivalent/resistant strategy as organized inflexible attention; the
infant was focused on only one aspect of the environment to cope
with the stress of the Strange Situation. In contrast to the avoidant
infant, the ambivalent/resistant infant maintained focus on their
attachment figure to the exclusion of exploring their surroundings
(Main, 2000). Yet, despite their mother’s return and attempt to
comfort them, they were unable to make use of her as a safe haven.
The child’s resistance to settling with their mother was
demonstrative of how they expected not to be satisfied or expected
that they would not have enough of what they wanted. Here, we can
see how the deep-seated dynamic of unrest turns into the self
experience of feeling unsoothable, which often follows the
ambivalent/resistant child into adulthood, where they continue to
look outside of themselves for relief, yet are not hopeful that relief
can be had.
With the ambivalent/resistant pattern, an inability to turn toward
the self stems from the inability to rely on the other. When the
caregiver’s inconsistency and unreliability are the norm, the lack of a
sensitive response generates a pattern of not knowing how to listen
and tend to the self’s own signals. Without timely and attuned care,
the infant’s need goes untended, and the signaling behavior itself
loses meaning. Unfortunately, this gap between signal and response
hinders the development of communication between the caregiver
and child, like that which develops in a secure infant with a sensitive
and responsive caregiver. As Bowlby allegedly said, “What cannot be
communicated to the mother (caregiver) cannot be communicated
to the self.” Ainsworth noted that secure babies and their caregivers
enjoy subtle levels of back-and-forth communication. Caregiver
attunement helps the infant to develop the capacity for refining
verbal and nonverbal signaling, so that natural call-and-response
patterns develop to the mutual satisfaction of both caregiver and
infant.
With the ambivalent/resistant pattern, the infant may resort to
screaming for attention (“reeling”). When they do break through to
the caregiver, the distressed call has often obscured the discrete

signal, or the caregiver’s preoccupation or overwhelm clouds their
ability to accurately perceive and interpret the meaning of the
infant’s signal. For example, the caregiver misreads the baby’s fussy
bids for attention as a sign of fatigue and puts them to bed or
quashes the baby’s protest rather than recognizing something was
missed (Ainsworth et al., 1978/2015). Thus the child is frustrated.
For the infant, having these kinds of repeated, unfulfilled
experiences develops expectancies that they are incapable of
attracting a satisfying response—they lose out on the development
of trusting themselves and trusting their innate signaling to draw the
help that they need.
When unable to obtain the consistent, appropriate response from
their caregiver, reaching for the other becomes needing the other
desperately (i.e., nondiscriminatingly, which is another shift away
from the awareness of what is specifically needed). The desperation
for the caregiver’s attention is so fraught with the child’s anticipation
of not receiving a response that reaching for the other becomes
reeling, and overrides what may have begun as the child’s needing
soothing for a momentary discomfort. Unfortunately, what is
internalized are feelings of unworthiness and inadequacy. Thus, the
pattern takes root. When inconsistency and unreliability are the
norm, the lack of optimal response generates a pattern in the baby
of both giving up on listening to the self’s own signals while also not
trusting the other to provide a suitable response.
Herein lies boundary confusion. Just as self-reliance in the
avoidant pattern has a pseudo quality, there is a similarity in how the
self, who is preoccupied with the other, is pseudo relational (i.e., not
truly relational). The caregiver who is entrenched in their own
preoccupation is impermeable to the needs of their child. The child
may be hollering for their caregiver’s attention. Instead of reflecting
the child’s feelings and relating to what is happening from the child’s
perspective, the caregiver, self-absorbed, anxious, and/or
overwhelmed, imposes their own experience of the situation. For
example, they might feel frustrated that the baby’s clamoring for
attention is happening when they, the caregiver, are already having a
really hard day. Instead of reaching tenderly for their child and

sensing what is needed, they may pick them up abruptly and bounce
them on their knee, with pseudo joy barely masking what is an
urgent plea to calm down.
Inadvertently, the caregiver is communicating their distress and
lack of ability to be sensitive to the child’s needs. Unable to attune to
what the child needs and provide the appropriate response, the
caregiver instead transmits their turmoil rather than contact or
reassurance. Thus, they add their own anxiousness to their child’s
discomfort. Unfortunately, the child becomes overly immersed in the
caregiver’s experience and internalizes the static of the caregiver’s
state of mind. Unable to have their need met contingently may well
lead to boundary confusion, and subsequent difficulties in self-
understanding.
Fonagy and Target (1997) conceptualize that “if secure
attachment is the outcome of successful containment, insecure
attachment may be seen as the infant’s identification with the
caregiver’s defensive behavior” (p. 686). They refer to the following
passage from Crittenden to describe the insecure ambivalent
pattern.
The preoccupied (E) caregiver may represent the infant’s
state with amplification and insufficient marking or
complicated by responses to the parent’s ambivalent
preoccupation with her own experience, so much so that the
symbolic potential of the exchange is lost . . . the infant
internalizes the caregiver’s attitude and “this dyssynchrony”
becomes the content of the experience of the self.
(Crittenden, 1994, p. 89)
The preoccupation and anxiety that originates in the parent’s state
of mind has now been transferred to the child. Rather than receiving
reflection and an appropriate response, the child’s experience
becomes subsumed in the parent’s experience, and the parent’s
chaotic helplessness becomes the child’s as well.

When a child has the experience of being met by their caregiver
with a sensitive and appropriate response, the child grows to feel
confident that they can influence what happens to them. They also
grow a trust in themselves to ask for what they need, and trust that
the other, their caregiver, is available for the provision of that specific
care and comfort. Instead, in the case of the ambivalent/resistant
attachment pattern, the caregiver’s preoccupation and overwhelm
interfere with the child’s being able to predict whether their wants
and needs will be met. Thus, the natural growth of self-awareness,
self-confidence, and self-agency is thwarted by the child’s lack of
being able to effectively influence what happens to them.
Clinical Example of the Preoccupied State of Mind
Next, we hear from a psychotherapy patient I have seen over many
years. Initially, the patient presented with an ambivalent pattern of
attachment, high anxiety, and marital dissatisfaction that centered
around her longing for her husband to be different: more
communicative, more expressive, more sensitive to her needs. In the
following vignette from a late treatment session, the patient explores
her experience in relationship to her mother’s preoccupied state of
mind. She notices her current self-awareness, compared to when
she was a child. The patient recognizes that she herself has
changed. I am choosing this slice of reflection for two reasons. First,
because the patient clearly describes the preoccupied state of mind
of her mother. And second, because it shows how the child is caught
between feeling criticized on the one hand, and on the other, is
trying to figure out how to please and help her mother. This dilemma
illustrates how boundaries get confused between child and mother
and how the child can become immersed in the mother’s state of
mind, and becomes preoccupied with her at the expense of
connecting with their own self experience.

Clinical Vignette 9A: “Seeing the Truth of How She Really Is”
The patient, Sandy, is intrigued to remember that as a child, despite
the experience of feeling criticized and judged, she longed to please
her mother. The desire to please is one of the traits identified in the
AAI discourse of preoccupied speakers. We enter this segment as
the patient feels sadness related to the lack of being seen and
acknowledged. However, instead of feeling sad from the helpless
perspective of her younger self not receiving her mother’s attention,
Sandy feels sad acceptance to recognize how her mother is unable
to give an attuned, empathic response. [AEDP State 3: mourning
the self. In her self-at-best, effective self, Sandy sees the
other, her mother, realistically.]
SANDY (PATIENT, PT): When I see her and she looks at me, I don’t
know, Karen, like you know people . . . she looks you over . . .
THERAPIST (TH): (nodding) Wow, and what’s that like? What happens
inside you when she looks you over? How about “she looks me
over”? [Inviting patient to explore her experience and shift
from the general “you” to her own sense of “me.”]
PT: It’s different now, I’m aware of it and I think it feels . . . or I
know it feels . . . [Her shift from “I think it feels” to “I know
it feels” shows growing confidence in her self-awareness.
She is able to tune into feeling for herself.]
TH: Hmm.
PT: Like I can see myself at different times in my life feeling
differently. Like I can see myself when I was younger feeling really
sad about it (right hand on heart as left reaches out, gesturing),
feeling not accepted, trying to fix myself, if I could get the right
outfit on, if I could lose weight or have the right job—something
that she could talk about me in a way that’s good—or if I could
help her more and if I could just listen to her longer and longer
and longer and figure it out for her . . . [here we see the
experience of her younger self caught in the pattern of
wanting to please her mother, wanting to listen and

wanting to help her . . . and not focusing on her own
experience] and then like now maybe I feel like it’s different.
Like I was really aware, she’s looking me over, but I didn’t feel so
confused. I feel more and more like this is (pause), maybe, I don’t
know, I feel like I spent less time thinking about it in a way . . .
[Distinguishing that now she is less caught up in thinking
about her mother’s view, which leads to less confusion.]
As Sandy is now capable of exploring her inner experience, she
notices how she felt when she was younger and received this kind of
evaluative look. Her younger self tried to figure out what she needed
to do, or be, to find acceptance in her mother’s eyes, whether it was
fixing something about herself or being available to help her mother.
In the repetition of “longer and longer and longer,” I hear the circular
dialogue and the feeling of being trapped. I respond by reflecting
the patient and elaborating her current experience by recognizing
that Sandy’s lack of taking her mother’s view of herself was related
to her increased awareness of her own experience instead of
preoccupation with her mother.
TH: You were less looking at yourself through her eyes and trying to
get it right. It was like you stayed in yourself. [Reflecting and
affirming her realization of what’s changed.]
PT: Oh, oh (looking up) yeah . . .
TH: Cuz looking at yourself through her eyes wasn’t an accurate
reflection of you . . . didn’t give you something, it more took you
into her view . . . and then you tried to please that. [This is an
example of how the child becomes overly immersed in the
mother’s experience.]
PT: Right . . . I think I felt being more set, firm . . . like I felt more,
like I know the word “grounded” is a common thing, but I think I
felt more like (arms moving down her sides close to her body),
just like I wasn’t penetrable or as easily permeable. [A somatic
shift in her experience of self.]

TH: You stayed in yourself. Your boundaries were less porous to her.
[Validating, emphasizing what the patient is realizing.
Together we are co-constructing the narrative.]
PT: Yeah, yeah, and like she kept asking me, “come over to my
house, come over to my house . . . I want you to spend time with
me alone.” And I know what that means. That means like come
over so I can have this conversation with you like I’ve had for 20
years. And I said no.
TH: Wow.
PT: Like I said it wasn’t going to work and I said to her “let’s enjoy
our time here at Cathy’s—my sister”—because she starts getting
me in the corner and she starts talking to me like “I don’t know
what to do, I don’t know what to do with the house, I don’t want
to live in the country.” (hands now circling and coming together in
front of her) “Help me decide what to do with my life. None of my
kids want me,” and she starts kind of crying . . . I was like, “Let’s
enjoy being together right now.” You know? [Rather than
joining her mother’s preoccupied worries and reeling
about the future, the patient set a boundary by saying no,
and repeated her invitation to enjoy being together in the
present moment.]
TH: Mm-hmm.
Here, instead of being caught in the longer and longer
conversations, the patient was aware of her mother’s pattern and
knew the boundary she wanted to set and how to express herself
clearly and kindly. The description of her mother’s speaking shows
preoccupied discourse; she is reeling as she moves from one topic to
the next, with a helpless passivity trying to enlist her daughter’s
attention and help. We can see how the patient recognized the
difference between how she feels now and the spinning she felt as a
child, when she was caught up and preoccupied with her mother’s
view of her. In current time, the patient was able to name her
boundary and respond to her mother with clear, caring redirection.
Simply stated. No protest.

The above vignette shows that Sandy was “feeling and dealing,
while relating.” She has differentiated and is aware of her own
personhood. The gold of this session was the patient’s exploring how
she coped in a fresh and autonomous way, in this current, yet ages-
old exchange with her mother. Highlighting and exploring such
moments of newfound growth and clarity is one of the ways AEDP
therapy leans into transformance and promotes our patients’
transformational process.
To complete this chapter, we describe how patients with this
pattern arrive to psychotherapy. Additionally, we introduce markers
of the preoccupied state of mind as identified through the AAI (Main
et al., 1985) and elaborated by Fonagy and Target (2007) about
what is noteworthy in the patient’s patterns of discourse.
The Initial Presentation
Many individuals who have patterns of ambivalent/resistant
attachment are motivated to seek out psychotherapy by problems in
their primary relationships. The struggle is often about finding the
“right” relationship or feeling satisfied in the relationship they’re in.
Their partners are described as elusive, rejecting, inadequate, not
fully available, closed, or walled off, making them difficult to reach or
the patient not feeling special. Excessive focus on the other, sensing
something is “off” with the other, and the distress this causes
provides clues to the patient’s earlier attachment-related trauma.
One presenting issue is the sense of “I am often choosing the
unavailable person, who comes on strong and then seems to vanish.
What am I doing wrong?” Another complaint is “I can’t seem to live
with them, yet I can’t live without them.” While real problems may
exist in the relationship, working them out is riddled with clinging
and protest, desperation about not having the love or attention of
this most flawed other and a helplessness to bring about the
necessary changes.
Here we see the patient’s excessive focus on the other.
Additionally, and even more to the heart of the presenting issue, is

the patient’s lack of focus on—and developed awareness about—
their own internal experience. When an individual comes to
treatment, another significant aspect of their presentation is the
fallout we described earlier in how through repeated experiences of
the caregiver’s misattunement and/or inconsistency, the child lost
trust in their capacity to affect their environment—their caregiver—to
get what they need. The cost here is that the patient lacks self-
awareness, and self-confidence, resulting from their continued
turning toward the other instead of tuning into themselves. Often,
they have difficulty with self-acceptance.
Other clues about their pattern of attachment comes through
their speech, which can be pressured, driven by the hope “If I can
hurry up and ‘get it all out,’ I will feel relieved.” Some words come
easily, too easily, and feel more like a wall of words. In this case, the
words lead me away from connection to the patient, rather than
toward greater connection. I can even get lost by the associative
links, bold hints of self-deprecation, aggravation, confusion, and/or
complaints about the ways others behave. Identifying these themes
as indicative of the patient’s state of mind from the outset, or as
early as possible, can be organizing and evoke compassion for
psychotherapists.
As we’ve been addressing throughout this chapter, it is helpful to
understand that our patients who come into treatment with the
ambivalent/resistant pattern of attachment were once infants who
grew up with a parent whose state of mind was preoccupied. To
describe this state of mind, we turn to the adults who classify as
preoccupied on the AAI (i.e., who have a preoccupied state of mind
regarding attachment). Their AAI interviews reveal an excessive,
confused preoccupation with their attachment figures that tends
toward passivity, anger, or dependency. Though they are adults,
their comments are rife with complaints about their parent yet are
often followed by their struggles to please them. Some speakers flip
into their parent’s voice as they address themselves during the
interview. The discourse contains lengthy descriptions that are
associative, entangled, and/or confusing (Main et al., 2008). Many
infants who developed an ambivalent/resistant pattern of attachment

grow into adults who exhibit a preoccupied state of mind. So the
descriptions here are fitting for psychotherapists to recognize in our
adult patients. My term “wall of words” describes the preoccupied
narrative, which can feel more like a barrier than an access point to
communication.
Fonagy & Target (2007) describe how preoccupation shows up in
patients’ gestural discourse in psychotherapy with run-on, entangled,
or unfinished sentences. They describe that the expressed gesture is
“one of needing to hold on, yet not being satisfied.” Losing track of
the question and rambling on to irrelevant topics is a mental gesture
that expresses a feeling of being lost or perhaps the very act of
losing. . . . “Sorry I lost my thread” or “What was that question
again?” (p. 442). When these phrases come from the patient in
psychotherapy sessions, they are illustrating some of the challenges
of preoccupation. When the therapist feels lost, such lostness can be
a marker of our need to step in and find an orientation with the
patient. Fonagy and Target identify discourse that contains a tangled
web of complaint, where there is both struggling and pushing away.
Yet, despite pushing away, the patient is not letting go, preventing
the possibility of separation (Fonagy & Target, 2007). This
description is quite apropos for a patient whose presenting problem
is serious discontent in a relationship; the patient may complain
about their partner’s behavior and express concern about relational
incompatibility. Still yet, they have tremendous difficulty seeing a
way out of the relationship or a way through to resolving conflict in
the relationship.
When sitting with a patient who is presenting a preoccupied state
of mind, I look for signs of the infant who did their best to adapt and
developed patterns of ambivalence and/or resistance. Here, we have
a clear window through which to see that how the child was treated
is how they have come to treat themselves and others. I want to
hold what is tangled in the light of the desire to understand how
these patterns came to make sense in the first place. Sometimes I
try to imagine the little one inside, wondering about their
experience, imagining the turmoil of needing attention and not being
tended in a timely or appropriate way. With the ambivalent/resistant

pattern, we are often facing the person’s expectancies that they will
not be heard and attended, and the hyperactivating strategies they
developed to try to reach their preoccupied caregivers, which have
followed them into adulthood.