10
Working to Transform Patterns of Ambivalent/Resistant
Attachment (Grids 1 and 3)
The more she learns about the nature of the creature she is caring for the easier and more satisfying she will find it. . .
.
—(BOWLBY 1953/1965, P. 20)
Ambivalence/Resistance & the Hyperactivating Strategy
As psychotherapists, our way of being with our patients is just as important as the interventions we
choose, and the interventions we choose are determined by our understanding of what people need. In
this chapter, we continue to apply the grids to treatment planning and intervening with our patients who
present with an ambivalent/resistant pattern of attachment. These patients’ insecure attachment has
compromised their trust that they can get enough of what they need in attachment relationships. We
refer to Grid 1, The Configuration of the Secure Attachment Pattern (see Chapter 5), to identify secure
ways of being that can help us to set conditions to establish a secure base for treatment. Additionally,
Grid 1 helps us recognize and affirm characteristics of secure functioning, especially with regard to
building affective competence and self-agency when they arise with these patients. Also, we’ve added
Grid 5, The Configuration of the Ambivalent/Resistant Attachment Pattern and Clinical Markers &
Interventions, to accompany this chapter.
Grid 5 combines markers of 10 aspects of the ambivalent/resistant attachment patterns from Grid 2,
such as characteristic fears: anxiety and characteristic defenses, arousal of the attachment system, self–
other relational patterning, and so on, with their corresponding interventions, desirable adaptive action
tendencies, and goals of interventions from Grid 3 to help tailor our treatment and interventions
accordingly. In order for our psychotherapy to be effective, our way of being with our patients must
foster the co-creating of new, positive experiences that help them grow confident and competent with
us as an attachment figure, so that together we can establish a reliable secure base for experiential
exploration.
TABLE 10.1  Grid 5. The Configuration of the Ambivalent/Resistant Attachment Pattern and Clinical Markers &
Interventions
 
CONFIGURATION OF
AMBIVALENT/RESISTANT
ATTACHMENT
AMBIVALENT/RESISTANT
CLINICAL
MARKERS AND
INTERVENTIONS
AMBIVALENT/RESISTANT
1
Caregiver characteristics:
state of mind with respect to
attachment
• Preoccupied
Patient state of
mind
Therapist common
reactivities
• Preoccupied
• Overwhelmed
• Agitated
• Overinvolved
• Not impacted
2
Caregiver characteristics:
behavioral hallmarks
• Inconsistent
• Unreliable
• Abandoning
Therapist
metaskills to
counter caregiver
hallmarks and
therapist common
reactivities
• Focus
• Firmness/directiveness
• Care
3
Response to arousal of the
attachment system
• Hyperactivation
Desirable adaptive
action
• Affirm self-adaptive action
tendencies

 
CONFIGURATION OF
AMBIVALENT/RESISTANT
ATTACHMENT
AMBIVALENT/RESISTANT
CLINICAL
MARKERS AND
INTERVENTIONS
AMBIVALENT/RESISTANT
4
Seeds of resilience
• Maintains relationships at
any cost
Goals of
interventions
• Containment/self-
regulation
• Connect with abandoned
parts of self
• Self-agency/self-worth
5
Characteristic nervous
system activation and affect
regulation
• External regulation
• Underregulates affect
• Fight
Working with
nervous system
and affect
regulation
• Down regulate
6
Defense: Characteristic
defenses against relatedness
&
Defense vs. relatedness:
• Wall of words
• Preoccupied
• Clings/protests
Working with
defenses against
relatedness
• Contain tangential speech
• Offer explicit help
• Cultivate connection to sel
experience
• Affirm or amplify glimmers
of self-regulating, self-care
self-knowing
characteristic defenses
against emotion
Defense vs. emotion:
• Emotionality
• Overly immersed
• Predicts the future
Working with
defenses against
emotion
• Distinguish emotionality
from emotion
• Empathize with core affect
• Connect emotion with
present experience
7
Anxiety: characteristic fears
• Abandonment
• Uncertainty
Working with
anxiety
• Build capacity for self-
regulation
8
Patterns of affective
competence (or lack thereof)
• Feeling—and reeling—but
not dealing
Building affective
competence
• Think about feelings
• Distinguish emotionality
from emotion
9
Self–Other
relational patterning
• Other-reliant
• “Moving against”
• Boundary confusion
Working with Self–
Other relational
patterning
• Differentiate self and othe
• Develop capacity to
internalize soothing
• Build receptive affective
capacity
10
Internal experience &
external reality: disconnects
(à la Fonagy)
• Psychic equivalence:
• Internal and external
worlds are equated
Connecting
internal experience
& external reality
• Build self-reflective
capacity
• Understand self
(Pando-Mars, 2016)
(Note. These are nonexhaustive lists)
Copyright © 2025 Pando-Mars
To prepare for engaging with patients who arrive with the ambivalent/resistant pattern and a
preoccupied state of mind, Grid 5 also includes both potential therapist common reactivities and also the
requisite metaskills, which are discussed throughout this chapter. We acknowledge that although our
nervous systems are wired to connect and to care, we all have our patterns, and, in some moments,
despite our sincere wanting to help, we as psychotherapists can find ourselves in an unintended
reaction to our patients. In this chapter’s section on the therapist stance, we have identified therapist
common reactivities that may occur and how to work with them (see also Chapter 6, pp. 188–189). To
counter the potential disruption of therapist reactivities, as well to provide intentional holding and
sensitivity that can give a therapeutic contrast to inconsistency and unreliability (the inconsistency and
unreliability of the original attachment figures), we have pinpointed several therapist metaskills (see
Chapter 6, pp. 190–192).
In my experience, being aware of therapist common reactivities and also of the necessary metaskills
allows me to catch myself earlier when I go off track with my patient. Having specific suggestions to
recognize and deal with the anxiety contagion prevalent with ambivalence/resistance helps me to self-

right (i.e., self-correct) more quickly. Using our left-brain reflection on what is happening is a helpful
coping skill both overall for managing anxiety and also specifically for treating ambivalent/resistant
attachment. In contrast, when working with someone with an avoidant attachment, using our right
brains to resonate with our patients’ underlying affect can help them to connect with themselves and
with us. Our intention here is to begin with the premise that our therapeutic container comprises two
human beings, and how we meet and what we do with our meeting is as important as the skills and
interventions that we subsequently provide.
Goals of Treatment
When working with someone who has an ambivalent/resistant pattern of attachment and a preoccupied
state of mind, building their capacity for self-care is a central aim of treatment. Grid 3 highlights self-
action tendencies as desirable adaptive actions for this pattern. Self-action tendencies are (a) becoming
aware of one’s own needs, (b) learning how to express them, and (c) being willing to stand up for
oneself (Fosha, 2000). I would also add to adaptive self-action tendencies (d) the patient’s learning to
distinguish between their wants and their needs, and (e) how to tend to their unmet childhood needs.
Healing involves a deep restoring of the capacity to listen inside and to care for and trust oneself, which
ultimately improves relationships with significant others. For therapists, recognizing and affirming
markers of self-action tendencies is vital for healing patterns of ambivalent/resistant attachment.
Helping our patients to increase self-regulation and containment and to connect with abandoned
parts of the self that got lost in the fray builds their self-agency, self-efficacy, and self-worth. Eileen
Russell (2021) has recognized the importance of the agentic self in healing from disrupted
developmental processes. She defines agency as having a felt sense of mattering and being able to
affect what happens, which is an essential component of healing ambivalent/resistant patterning. Also
included in goals of interventions is recognizing how the patient impacts others. This awareness grows
from differentiating between self and other, thoughts from feelings, and past from present.
As I’ve been working with this chapter, I noticed that my notes and parts of the first draft were
repetitive, sprawling, and tangential. I could see evidence of activation, difficulty focusing, and getting
lost in the words. Viewing my writing has been both fascinating and humbling; in these pages about
working with the pattern of ambivalent attachment, I witnessed elements of how the ambivalent
discourse appears in the AAI! Of course, it makes sense that to engage with the topic of ambivalent
attachment, and the clinical experiences that follow, my writing would reflect some
ambivalence/resistance and activation. I share this in the spirit of transparency and encourage
psychotherapists to pay attention to ourselves in the process of being with our patients. After all, our
attachment systems are hardwired in us, at the ready to be activated; they are giving us clues all the
time. Putting these clues to use, by recognizing our own signals, is a key part of regulation—which is
crucial in working through hyperactivating strategies with our patients.
In the next section, we proceed to setting the stage for treatment, followed by referencing the grids
and some of the AEDP triangle schemas to orient and organize what we do. Then, in the following
sections, we continue to discuss intervention sequences. We also share clinical vignettes that illustrate
working with specific aspects of ambivalent/resistant attachment and show progression toward healing
and transformation.
From the Get-Go
When our patients present with hyperactivating strategies, the intensity can be activating for
psychotherapists, and we need to work on slowing down and anxiety regulation in ourselves, alongside
our patients. Here, similar to the patients with avoidance who use deactivating strategies, addressing
attachment needs of being seen and responded to in patients with hyperactivating strategies is
necessary. As we discussed in the previous chapter, the avoidant pattern requires up regulating and
building awareness. Connection to self is essential for patients to grow beyond the shutdown and what
R. D. Laing (1969, quoted in Bromberg, 2011, p. 31) refers to as “unawareness” that follows the
dismissing minds of their early caregivers. In contrast, when working with the hyperactivating strategies

of the ambivalent/resistant pattern we focus on down regulating and containment to help patients slow
down and begin to deal with the separation distress/fears of abandonment and uncertainty that are so
prevalent with this pattern.
Communicating readiness to help. From the get-go, psychotherapists must situate ourselves so that we
are available to help. In addition to an appropriate response, another necessary aspect of sensitivity
that Ainsworth et al. (1978/2015) defined in the caregiving scales, is promptness of response. A major
hallmark of inconsistent caregiving is the timing of the caregiver’s response—more based on what suits
them or what they are capable of in the moment, rather than based on the timing of what the infant
needs when the infant needs it. AEDP Maxim 10, Going “Beyond Mirroring” to Helping (Fosha, 2000b),
is central to working with ambivalent/resistant patterning: it involves being aware of what the patient
needs in the moment and being available to help them in the moment. In the beginning of treatment,
encouraging the patient to slow down, take a breath, and listen inside, helps them connect with how
they are feeling.
Communicating to the patient what we are seeing. Second, from the get-go, finding a way to
communicate what we are seeing to the patient is particularly helpful. In doing so, they can experience
being seen. By reflecting what we hear, we help them feel heard. As shown in the vignette in the
preceding chapter, even in later stages of treatment, reflecting the patient’s words and gestures, and
picking up the themes of their dialogue, provides holding and being together. And in AEDP, we privilege
doing so in an affirmative fashion, heightening either the adaptive nature of patients’ responses or
empathy and compassion for the difficulties they are facing. Showing the patient that they are not
alone, but rather, they are being seen and being heard, can substantiate for them that there is an
attachment figure present and available. When this happens from the get-go and over time, we help the
patient to have an experience of a consistent and reliable other, who they can predict will be seeking to
understand them and helping them to understand themselves.
Helping our patients by engaging with focused levels of attention and care requires that the
therapist take an active therapeutic stance.
The Therapist Stance: Therapist Common Reactivities and Metaskills
In AEDP, the therapist stance is not neutral; we do not stay hidden without expression when we meet
our patients. As Fosha (2017b) said, we do not do attachment-focused therapy with a still face:
therapist’s affect is an important part of the therapeutic field. And here, working with our patients who
present with an ambivalent resistant pattern of attachment, this is all the more central. We welcome
them with openness and interest, conveying our availability and willingness to help. From our first
moments of meeting the patient, we are considering how to set conditions for co-establishing safety
and building a secure base for our work together. We listen to what the patients want that propel them
to seek treatment, and we notice how we feel moved by them and their quest for feeling loved and
known, and we let our response be knowable. How they enter the process of psychotherapy tells us
something about them; how we engage tells them something about us.
Growing up with a preoccupied caregiver gave our patients a pervasive fear of not getting enough
proper attention and a contingent, timely response. So when they arrive to psychotherapy they may
need our help and direction to learn how to make use of our relational engagement. The consequence
of the parenting they received often manifests in difficulty understanding their own signals of distress,
what they mean, how to communicate them, and even less how to use those signals of distress to
inform the kind of care that they need. The hope for connection and help is often shielded by
anticipations of being missed and mistreated, and a negative appraisal of self. From the start, an active
therapist stance is crucial to provide accompaniment and guidance to counter those expectancies and
help to set the course of the session in the right direction.
As we begin to engage, we might hear how the patient is driven by anxiety, falls back on a
hyperactivating strategy (i.e., exaggerated complaints, self-reports of clinging behaviors, excessive focus
on a partner’s intentions and motivations) and little or no focus on their own internal life. Or they speak

in a preoccupied and unclear manner. When this happens, it is important for us to pay attention to how
we respond. Here is where therapist metaskills and therapist common reactivity come into the picture
(Chapter 6, pp. 188–192). When the distress related to ambivalent/resistant patterning arises,
psychotherapists might need to check in with ourselves “Are we feeling able to stay present and
facilitative with our patients?” or “Are we feeling thwarted?” Sometimes when our patients speak
intensely and describe dramatic displays of clinging and protest behavior, we may be subject to a blind
spot, caught up in a reaction of feeling overwhelmed or agitated. Our own nervous system might
activate; getting triggered, we might find ourselves off center. Or when our patient is speaking
breathlessly, shifting from one association to the next, we may see issues mounting before us, and yet,
overwhelmed by the avalanche of problems, have difficulty choosing an entry point.
Therapist common reactivities. We have identified that with an ambivalent/resistant presentation, these
therapist common reactivities may occur: feeling overwhelmed, agitated, not impacted by the patient. If
we find ourselves caught in one of these compromised states, our awareness of these reactions can
alert us to pay attention to what is happening. As soon as possible, we need to regulate and ground
ourselves, and then we have the option to consciously draw upon a suitable metaskill to help us orient
to what is needed to help the patient. The patient is showing up the only way they know, but we have
options—and by gathering our focus and calming our own nervous system, we can set ourselves on
track to meet our patient and provide structure to help them to establish connection with themselves
and with us.
Therapist metaskills. If we do find that we are challenged, we can hopefully quiet our self-critical voices
by remembering that we all are susceptible to potential reactions that might arise in a flash and set us
back. The important element here is not the setback but rather our return. As soon as possible, we
engage our willingness to explore what is happening and how we can help our patients to let us help
them. Having selected metaskills can remind us of what may be needed to counter the above common
reactivities; being focused, firm, directive, and caring can help us to intervene with intentional
sensitivities to promote the right action. Moving closer to a patient with big energy may seem
contradictory, and yet by leaning in with care and direction we can say, “There is so much here, and I
want to hear you, and if we can take a moment to take a breath together, I trust we can find our way.”
To connect directly like this can be containing and settling to both the patient’s and therapist’s nervous
systems.
Case Example
The following vignette is from the first moments of an initial psychotherapy session with a new patient,
Megan, which illustrates taking an active therapist stance, which I could see was necessary in response
to the patient’s presentation. Right off the bat, she shares with me her recent experience from a first
session with another potential new therapist she consulted. I hear the patient describe a version of her
wishing to “get it all out,” and yet, she left that earlier session feeling dysregulated, overwhelmed, and
just plain bad. I take her cue about what she needs: immediately, explicitly, I stepped in to say that I
did not want her to have a repeat of that experience. It became clear that rather than “needing to get it
all out” while the therapist “listens,” what she really needed was a structure for our session. More
precisely, she needed me, her attachment-oriented therapist, to set some structure so that she would
not flounder, left to her own devices.
We enter at the first moment our session begins (on Zoom).
Vignette 10A, Part 1: “Exactly What I Don’t Want You to Do!”
THERAPIST (TH): Here we are (warmly smiling, bright eyes) [I’m acknowledging the shift from
talking on the phone to seeing each other over Zoom.] and I’d love for you to just start . . .

however it feels important for you to begin. [She had told me she had much experience in
therapy, so I open with a spacious invitation.]
MEGAN (PATIENT, PT): I don’t really have a clear or a great idea about that [hinting she may need
help]. I, I did a first session with a therapist recently and was like, well, I better just, like, vomit out
all the bad stuff about my family, too. Like, I gave some background and ended up, like, really
destabilized and fucked up after that . . . [I hear how she was activated in the session yet
wasn’t tracked for anxiety regulation and what she was managing or not managing. Plus
“vomit” makes it clear that that is not the way to go.]
TH: Exactly what I don’t want you to do! [I step in immediately, engaging an active therapist
stance.]
PT: So, I’m not going to do that, but I’m not . . . (trails off, leans head back, eyes get wide, closes her
mouth) [indicating she heard me but doesn’t know what to do].
TH: [Metaskills of being directive and caring are at the ready.] How about if I give you how I
would like to suggest you start? [Asking permission to offer help and guidance and to let her
know how I will conduct the session.]
PT: (immediately fast nods) Yes, please. Thank you. [She is grateful for not being left to her own
devices.]
TH: Okay (eyes look up), I think there’s a few things that are really important. One is connecting with
something that you want (hand touches heart, then palm opens) from being here today, over the long
haul. Today is really important because today is about how we work together and, do we want to go
forward? So, I think sometimes it’s nice to start with “What do I want (hand touches heart) from
being here?”
PT: Mm-hmm.
TH: And as I start to talk about that, notice what occurs . . . the important thing (hands connect, fingers
interlace) is to really notice what happens as you speak, what happens in your body, and what starts
to emerge feeling wise (hands open and continue to move in gesture) because that’s how we’ll get a
sense of how you stay in your window of tolerance. [Introducing the somatic focus and the
importance of connection to self, I’m reflecting the need to keep an eye out for
regulation.]
PT: (nodding, eyes widen) Mm-hmm.
TH: You know, and from time to time, I’ll probably check in and just ask, “How are you feeling with
yourself?” and “How are you feeling with me?” (hands motion back and forth between us) How does
that sound? [Metaprocessing how the structure and outline for beginning the session lands
with her.]
PT: (nods, smiles) That sounds very doable. Yes. [Direct and coordinated response; helps patient
feel competent.]
TH: Okay. (cheek rests on left palm, eyes looking at patient)
PT: Okay. (eyes closed) So, um, I think I mentioned to you when we spoke a couple of days ago that my
main goals right now really have to do with, like, self-image and self-worth. [I am impressed with
how she drops into her clarity and motivation.]
TH: Mm-hmm. (brings hand down, nods) [affirming para-verbals]
PT: And with (eyes look up) being able to trust my own judgment or feeling that my judgment is like
that, it matters and that it is worth trusting (eyes look sideways) and also, you know, being able to
have a more complex view of myself that’s not like really black and white or dichotomous or extreme.
(raises eyebrows) I’m trying to frame that in positive terms, but I don’t, I literally don’t know what
I’m looking for on that front. So, I don’t have the right language for like what the nondichotomous
thing would be . . . [The description is broadening and sounds diffuse so I step in to
refocus.]
Therapist takes an active therapeutic stance. In the first minute of our session, the patient revealed a
huge red flag: how dysregulated she became in her prior session. She thought she needed to provide
the potential therapist with a whole lot of negative background, and I was instantly struck by my
conviction that a first session is an opportunity for the patient and therapist to learn how to work

together (as opposed to gathering history). Holding an attachment-based frame, I embodied the
position of the older, wiser other, who aimed to help her have a different and good experience. I
recognized the need for safety and was moved to help her and offered structure and direction; it was
important that she listen to herself while sharing with me. I communicated how we will monitor the
need for regulation by registering and being with the experience as it unfolds. Also, I was explicit that I
would check in with her about how she is feeling with herself and with me, both as preparation and
reassurance that she does not have to figure this out alone.
From the earliest moments, we are appraising each other relationally, and my taking an active
stance is an important intervention for guiding us to develop a safe base for our work together.
Additionally, the gestures and nonverbal expressions marked in parentheses are signals that show
coherence between what I’m saying and offering. Our nonverbal language communicates how we
respond and coordinate with each other, which contributes to how the session unfolds.
TH: Maybe trusting in myself. What would that be like? You know, I guess I just want to offer you the
sense that you can take it really slow here. [Bringing focus to slowing down so we can tend to
the experiential aspect of the process.]
PT: (eyes engaged, smiles, throat visibly tightens)
TH: And even though we’re talking about what you want and that sounds lofty and could be big, it could
also be like, maybe I’d like to see if “I could stay connected to myself during this session today.” [I
model using “I messages” to entrain the patient’s focus on herself.]
Slowing down to help patient connect with herself. As I’m listening to what Megan wants regarding self-
trust, I shape a goal for this session about going slow and helping her connect with herself, working
together to help her be able to learn how to pace herself, to regulate when needed, and to learn about
her window of tolerance. I take the lead as empathically as I can and offer her the focus that has
crystallized in my mind for establishing safety in our session. I am firm about not wanting to repeat her
last experience of destabilization, helplessness, and feeling bad about herself.
PT: (nodding, eyes open, brighten) Okay.
TH: You know, what would that take? [Asking for her agency and involvement]
PT: Effort. (smiling, squinting eyes) Thought? Yes.
TH: Presence?
PT: Yes. (eyes close)
TH: (head drops down, gesture of apology) I mean, I don’t mean to dismiss what you say, but . . . [I
have a moment of concern that I have overstepped and want to offer repair if needed.]
PT: Nope, I appreciate it. (laughing)
While I feel clear about suggesting that Megan could work on staying connected to herself and see
what that brings, there is also a part of me witnessing myself, aware that the patient’s experience may
or may not receive my good intention.
Checking in with the patient. Interventions that explicitly ask the patient how our comments land and
affect them are an integral part of healing attachment wounding and a key aspect of AEDP attachment
work. In my case, I was indirect in saying, “I don’t mean to dismiss what you say.” Fortunately, the
patient gets my meaning, which she acknowledges by appreciating my stepping in: a positive signal that
she understands my intention and is feeling understood by me. If the exchange had gone differently, I
would have responded in kind and taken the steps to recoordinate and repair. However, our work
continued to unfold, and we proceeded with our goals as established. We return to this session later in
the chapter.

What This Vignette Shows About Working With Ambivalent/Resistant Attachment
When the therapist steps in and helps. In the ambivalent/resistant pattern of attachment, the patient’s
experience of distress is often generalized, and trusting their own self for clues about what is truly
needed is foreign or fraught. As we see in the above scenario, the patient had a negative experience of
becoming overwhelmed by her attempt to disclose her family background and the pain and difficulty
that followed when she was left too much on her own. She knew her residual experience was not
therapeutic and she didn’t want a repeat. Yet, on her own, she did not know how to proceed. She didn’t
ask for guidance because it didn’t occur to her that she could ask for help, and that if she asked, it
would be given. And that if it was given, that it could be helpful.
Megan needed help to navigate the thin line between revealing history and being in the present
moment where healing can happen, when new and corrective relational and emotional experience can
begin to transfer into new learning, new neural pathways, and a new sense of self-trust and self-agency.
Currently, the patient’s self remains a bit of a mystery to her; entangled with introjects and misleading
beliefs. What she needs is diffuse and at an early stage of her being able to both recognize it and
articulate it. And yet, as I am engaging with an active therapist stance, with a specific intention to set
conditions to establish safety and undo aloneness, we can see she has a positive response. Megan
engages with her self-at-best. She is cooperative and shows receptivity to my intentions and availability.
She makes good use of the help I offer and allows herself to be moved, and to share herself as best she
can. She works genuinely with what arises in her as she is with me. We are forming a coordinated
therapeutic relationship.
When the therapist is in a common reactivity. In contrast, when or if psychotherapists become
overwhelmed or activated, we may miss clues about how to be of help and may miss opportunities to
take the lead. In other words, we are in an unintended reaction. Alternately, taking such an active
stance can be challenging for therapists whose training emphasized listening for a while and then
interpreting. Nevertheless, with patients presenting with the ambivalent/resistant pattern of attachment,
this level of therapeutic engagement (i.e., being active and taking the lead) is crucial. When we are
tuned in and willing to step in, we set the pace for the session, and the patient has a much better
chance of being a fuller version of themselves than when they are constricted by their attachment
patterning. Our session has a very different potential to unfold with healing from the get-go!
Organizing Experiential Work With AEDP Representational Schemas
We presented the AEDP representational schemas used to guide experiential work in Chapter 3, “The
Move to Experience and Transformation” and applied them in Chapter 8, “Working to Transform Patterns
of Avoidant Attachment.” As we see in the above clinical example, it is imperative for psychotherapists
to have a way to track (a) the patient’s attachment system arousal; (b) their means of regulating affect;
(c) how anxiety and (d) defense manifest, given their attachment strategy; and finally, (e) the patient’s
affective competence. These five categories were introduced in Grids 1 and 2, as Row 3 and Rows 5–8,
which identify the constellation of secure and insecure attachment (Chapter 5, pp. 156–162). These
categories are related to the AEDP TOE, upon which defenses are represented on the upper left corner,
anxiety is represented on the upper right corner, and core affective experience is represented on the
bottom corner.
The TOE (see Chapter 3) provides a schema upon which we can track, moment-to-moment how the
patient moves toward and away from core affective experience. In treating ambivalent/resistant
patterns of attachment, affect regulation needs to be front and center in the work. The AEDP TOE is
pivotal to informing therapists how to recognize anxiety, what to look for as markers of the specific
kinds of emotional and relational defenses that pertain to ambivalent/resistant attachment, and how we
can intervene. In the following section we present the specifics pertaining to the ambivalent/resistant
TOE.

The TOE: Ambivalent/Resistant
See Figure 10.1, page 292.
Turn It On and On and On . . .
The ambivalent/resistant pattern is often referred to as anxious ambivalent or even “the anxious one.”
Although it is inaccurate to pin anxiety to one pattern, there is truth in that high levels of anxiety are
part of the picture in a person presenting with the ambivalent/resistant pattern, which fuels
hyperactivating strategies. It behooves therapists to have skills geared toward recognizing and
regulating anxiety in our patients, and also in ourselves. The contagion factor is real.
Anxiety. On the ambivalent/resistant TOE (see Figure 10.1), anxiety is represented on the upper right
corner of the triangle. Anticipation of not knowing what to expect generates arousal in the individual.
Their expectancies of uncertainty, separation, and/or hurt trigger anxiety and inhibiting affects, which
appear in the mind as preoccupation, rumination, vacillation in self-image or self-worth, cognitive
disruption, getting lost or forgetting what was just said, and tangential or run-on sentences. Anxiety
appears in the body as shallow breathing, increased heart rate, tension in muscles, big or sudden
movements, worried facial expressions, and somatization.
Emotionality. A very important point when it comes to the ambivalent/resistant pattern has to do with
emotionality, which is often confused with genuine emotion (much like for the avoidant pattern,
defensive self-reliance is mistaken for genuine self-reliance; see the Fosha, 2000b, section entitled “All
That Glitters Is Not Gold,” and later in this chapter, p. 300, for a detailed discussion of this point).
Anxiety and defense combine in the emotional field as emotionality, which is the mixture of anxiety and
emotion that is not core emotion, and that does not subside in relief. Emotions that don’t arc in waves
that crest and fall, and aren’t sourced in the body, are not core emotions. Arousal can often lead to
emotional dysregulation and/or hyperactivating behaviors. It explains the characterization of this style
as “feeling and reeling.”

Figure 10.1 The Triangle of Experience: Ambivalent/Resistant
Pando-Mars, 2024, adapted from Fosha, 2020

Defenses against emotion. Defenses are represented on the upper left corner of the
ambivalent/resistant TOE. Emotionality is a defense against (genuine) emotion: It is driven by anxiety-
motored thoughts that intensify worry, agitation, or distress. The person is overly immersed in the
emotional experiences of others, which further contributes to boundary confusion. This applies to
bundled affects and defensive emotions as well. For example, bundled affects, a mixture of anger and
sadness, or defensive emotions, such as anger in place of sadness, or anger that is watered down with
weepy tears, are defenses against emotion seen in the ambivalent/resistant pattern. Speech patterns
that include voluminous details, tangential thinking, and walls of words also act as a defense against
emotion as they distract the person away from connection to bodily rooted emotional experience.
Defenses against relatedness. Relational preoccupation, the pseudo relationality we discussed earlier
(see Chapter 9), is a defense against relatedness. Just as defensive self-reliance is not genuine self-
reliance, and emotionality is not core emotion, relational preoccupation is not genuine relatedness.
When there is excessive focus on the other, connection to oneself is often excluded. Clinging and
protest are also aspects of preoccupation. Verbally, when topic after topic is expressed, tangential, and
hard to follow, connection and true engagement is difficult. A mounting wall of words is a defense
against relatedness, keeping people out rather than letting them in. When the person is distressed,
seeks comfort, yet is unable to allow themselves to be soothed by another, this ambivalence reflects
defenses against relatedness.
Core affective experience. At the bottom of the ambivalent/resistant TOE is core affective experience,
which can be categorical emotions, relational affective experiences, and self-affective experiences. Core
affective experience may be maladaptive or adaptive. On the bottom left are maladaptive core affective
experiences, such as pathogenic affects and unbearable states of traumatic aloneness (see Chapter 3,
pp. 105–106). Though these are bodily rooted, they are not intrinsically transforming and instead, they
need to be transformed: they need our relational accompaniment to counter the relational wounding
that gave rise to these states. Thus, we have the imperative to work through defenses against
relatedness; the patient must be able to receive our relational connection to heal the deep aloneness
and/or shame that stems from attachment trauma (Chapter 3, pp. 119–120), that addresses working
with receptive affective experience). On the bottom right are adaptive core affective experiences
(Chapter 3, p. 106). In the presence and regulated accompaniment of another, bodily rooted core
affective experiences are transforming.
In Chapter 8, working with avoidant attachment, we discussed relational affective experiences,
which are key to the explicit and experiential relational work we engage to treat attachment trauma.
Additionally, and often key in the treatment of ambivalent attachment, are the self-affective
experiences, the self’s perception, reception, and expression of the self, which we discuss below in the
section about working with core affective experience. We also focus on helping our patients to
experience their genuine core emotions and facilitate their experiential completion. We aim to foster the
springing forth of the adaptive action tendencies rooted in each emotion. In addition to being with and
processing emotion, we engage the use of portrayals. Portrayals are an experiential technique using real
or imagined scenes to access, heighten, or deepen the completion of core affective experience. The
patient is invited to have a reparative, longed for, or avoided experience in their imagination, which can
foster healing and corrective emotional or relational experiences.
In the next section, we present interventions and practices for working with anxiety and affect
regulation, including the next section of the case vignette we began above. From there, we return to a
discussion about defenses against emotion and defenses against relatedness. We explore some specific
issues that arise and some intervention sequences for how to work with them. After that, we discuss
interventions for working with emotion/core affective experience, maladaptive and adaptive, as it
pertains to the pattern of ambivalent/resistant attachment. Throughout each of these sections, we
mention potential therapist common reactivities and the conscious use of therapist metaskills, since
keeping an eye out for these can sharpen the implements in our tool kits.

Working With Anxiety: Dyadic Regulation and Self-Regulation
Slow down: use voice, tone, pace, and prosody to entrain the right brain. Slowing down is key to
regulating anxiety. How we help our patients to slow down begins with ourselves, finding a comfortable
grounded posture and way of being that offers containment, yet readiness to act. The way we use our
voices, slow down and low down (Prenn, 2011), our voice tone, pace, and prosody, communicates our
presence and can convey calm to an activated patient, entraining their right brain with our right brain. It
is important to be sensitive to how the patient arrives and to see and be with them where they are, so
even if they are operating at high energy, they initially feel matched and thus, they feel seen. From
there, working to help them to settle can be a co-constructed process.
A potential therapist common reactivity can arise with a patient who is reeling (i.e., expending high
levels of energy), when the therapist, in an effort to maintain a calm presence, falls back on an avoidant
strategy. Instead of self-regulating, the therapist is deactivating. Tips to notice this might be that the
therapist is less engaged, less explicitly containing, less attuned, and thereby less empathic to the
efforts the patient is making to express their distress. Such a blind spot can happen to any of us.
Perhaps, without realizing it, we go through the motions, following the patient in an effort to catch up.
Our rationalization can be something like “Let me let them tell their story. They need to do that,” when
actually it is we who have disconnected.
Help the client make use of your presence and care. When patients present with anxiety, either by their
naming it directly or through manifesting distress or agitation somatically and/or in their manner, dyadic
regulation is essential. We can offer regulation verbally or nonverbally, explicitly, or implicitly. AEDP
Maxim 3, Stay With It and Stay With Me (Fosha, 2017b), suggests our intention to accompany patients
with whatever experience is arising. We want to help them to manage what has been overwhelming
while helping to titrate their experience, regulate their anxiety, and keep the process feeling safe. Only
when patients feel safe enough and regulated enough, can they drop into risking being with their
genuine feelings, and only then are they able to process emotion to completion. When the above
patient revealed her negative family history, to the point of feeling destabilized, her experience indicated
dysregulation. As an attachment figure, we step in to help the vulnerable one who may not be aware of
their limits. We track markers of anxiety to ensure that while our patient may be working at the edge,
they have not exceeded the upper edge of their window of tolerance. We hold a steady presence to
stabilize our container, and we are available to help them explore, when needed, how to recalibrate and
regroup.
If the patient’s speech is moving fast and changing topics, psychotherapists can step in actively, with
kindness and care, and offer containment to the patient by reflecting, summarizing, or empathizing with
them. Sometimes saying, “I really want to hear you. Would it be all right to take a breath here and
notice what is already on the table and where we might want to focus?” I want to help my patient find
greater calm as we shape their capacity to respond to what is driving their activation.
Down regulate: help the patient learn how to reduce anxiety. To actively teach patients to recognize
their own signals of anxiety is empowering. Then, giving them grounding, self-regulating skills and/or
breathing practices helps them learn how to tend to their activation. The more they can regulate
anxiety, the more capable they will feel to allow glimmers of core affective experiences to emerge,
which we can accompany and help them to process. When focusing a patient on anxiety regulation, we
are helping to redirect their attention to self-care, so as to be less at the mercy of the other that they
yearn for but cannot let in.
In the following vignette, we return to the first session with Megan, the patient featured above in
Vignette 10A, Part 1. From the start I bring dyadic regulation into our equation by being active and
collaborative. As promised, I check in with her after some sharing and exploration. I ask about her
experience to learn how activated she is, how she shows it, and how well she can manage with my
help. When Megan has an experience of regulating her anxiety with my accompaniment, some core
affective experience emerges in the form of a younger aspect of self and awareness of her pain.

Vignette 10A, Part 2: “Slow Down . . . Notice How You Feel in Your Body Right Now as You Tell Me . . .”
We have just spent a few minutes with Megan telling me about the painful beliefs she holds about
herself and their origins in her family. I ask how she is feeling in the moment, wanting to check in to be
sure we are tracking her activation together and paying attention to how she feels as she is speaking.
TH: Slow down for a second, because that’s a share about your family that you just brought out. I just
want you to notice how you feel in your body right now as you tell me about that.
PT: Tense (shakes her head side to side), worked up.
TH: Okay, so can we, like—let’s just deal with that tense and worked up. So, before we add any more on
to it, let’s just find how to be with tense (places hand on heart) and what tense and worked up
needs. [Showing the patient how we check in along the way as she is disclosing, so we
can intervene if needed to regulate each sharing, each impact of anxiety: modeling
tending to the self from the start.]
PT: Okay.
TH: Where do you feel the tension?
PT: My heart rate’s up and my side muscles are tensing (hands come up, clenched), which is something
that they often do (voice rises, hesitantly).
TH: Okay. So, what about taking your hands and just placing them on your heart? [This self-
compassion practice, called soothing touch, comes to mind as she mentions her heart.]
PT: Okay (eyes look up).
TH: Have you ever done this kind of soothing touch?
PT: Uh-uh (places both hands on her heart, shakes her head no, stays in eye contact with me).
TH: So, this is a really common practice. We put our hand on our heart to calm the nervous system. The
ventral vagal nerve connects to the heart. And the people doing research on compassion talk about
this as soothing touch1 (patient’s eyes brighten and she nods). Okay, so we can think of this as
soothing touch. Whatever feels right to your heart (patient presses her fingertips into her heart area)
[Patient’s nonverbals are clearly coordinating with therapist’s guidance], you want to just
let the heart rate know, you know (therapist pauses, leaning in with gentle rocking) something kind,
like what would be something kind you could say to yourself about sharing this with me?
In retrospect, I now wish I could have broken that into two interventions—with a pause in between to
metaprocess the impact of the felt sense of Megan’s hand on her heart. Yet given all of the negative
self-beliefs that were circulating, communicating kindness to her heart was on my mind. I felt kind,
tender; my body gently rocking, and wondered if she might resonate with giving a kind message to
herself. And she did.
PT: (looking up, breathes) I mean, I guess just like “that was hard for child you.” (she frowns, eyes
darken) I don’t know.
TH: Yes. Perfect. Perfect. [Affirming her self-compassion, which I also see as transformance.]
So maybe the little one in you is even nearby. How old? Let’s just pick an age. [The fact that her
response goes to providing an empathic corrective message to her younger self moves
me, and I want to follow her direction and see where we can go.]
PT: Eight. [She names an age right away.]
TH: Okay. How about if you just let yourself say to your 8-year-old self, “that was really hard.” [Offering
a portrayal—a way to bring her kind message to her younger self using her imagination.]
PT: (looking up, eyes shift a little, she’s breathing) [She appears to be deeply engaging internally.]
TH: That was . . . hard. (I continue as if talking now to the child, still rocking, hand on my heart) And
you’re really okay. Just as you are. Right now . . .
PT: (eye squeeze closed for a moment as she smiles)
TH: That’s the message I want you to know . . . (pause) How’s that to hear me say? (speaking gently,
with kindness) Was it too fast? [Metaprocessing how my comment lands, through her, to her
younger self.]

PT: It’s nice. I appreciate the impulse behind it. [Her response lets me know she is taking
kindness in, and now I’m wondering what she perceived as the impulse behind it . . .]
TH: Can you say something like that to yourself? Can you take that? Either I can say it again or you can
take that into that little 8-year-old.
PT: (nodding, sits up taller and rolls her shoulders back)
TH: Yeah. Good for you . . . right? Then you start to notice the tightness wants to roll . . . let it happen,
you know, see what those tight muscles, what they need. [Affirming and reflecting how I see
her engaging and seeming to listen to herself. I track her shoulders rolling and inquire as
to what they might be communicating.]
Moment-to-moment tracking. As Megan straightened her spine, I detected a shift. Though the intention
was anxiety regulation, and indeed that was accomplished, that spontaneously led to a piece of deep
work: a piece of experiential work to acknowledge her younger self with empathy, maybe compassion. I
find that when patients who present with ambivalent/resistant patterns are accompanied and able to
regulate anxiety, and they can stop reeling, often an aspect of core affective experience emerges.
Following the patient’s lead and bringing tending to this younger self was an affirmation of our working
alliance. As a dyad we were establishing enough safety and stability to open to this deeper level of
work. When Megan begins to roll her shoulders, I wonder if she needs a pause, perhaps she is nearing
the edge of her window of tolerance for taking in something new. By slowing down and being with her
movement we give the body space for digestion and expression.
PT: Yeah. (sits up and moves shoulders forward and back)
TH: See if you can give yourself a little more space just to be here just as you are. [Inviting her to
bring her awareness to the present-moment experience. Here, like Mindell and Mindell
(2002) said, the most powerful intervention is to focus on something that is already
happening.]
PT: (nodding, exhales) Okay.
TH: Okay. What’s okay? (smiling) [Staying with her word and exploring what she means.]
PT: That’s. I’m feeling a little better. A little less, like on edge, I guess. [Her feeling relief after this
process indicates receptivity to our tuning in and regulating together.]
TH: So, how’s that? That you can feel a little less on edge right now? [metaprocesssing the shift]
PT: It’s good. I’m, like, trying to figure out what to take from that [self-reflective question]. But
maybe that’s, like, later . . .
TH: I’m not going to make it hard for you—what to take from here is when you feel some activation, we
want to tend to it right away. And when possible [to see], whether you can connect to where that’s
coming from.
Responding directly to the patient’s question. I hear Megan pose genuine self-reflection and choose to
respond directly. Since we are in a first session, my being explicit about the intention to regulate and be
with her experience affirms the steps we have taken. We are doing what we set out to do. Here, we
implement what Fosha (2000a) describes as the purpose of metaprocesssing: that is, that it is not
enough for the patient to have a new experience; they need to know that they have had it. For Megan,
to have an experience of regulating tension and anxiety with a new therapist is a contrast to her recent
experience. She questions what to do with the new experience—I want to help her understand the lay
of the land—and add a bit of psycho-education. When anxiety presents, first we regulate, and then we
have an opportunity to listen for what stirs from underneath. She identified a younger self, who was
directly involved in what she had been talking about. Her capacity to make the connection, offer
empathy to her younger self, and reach a sense of relief was important for us, as a therapist–patient
dyad who are learning how to work together.
We return later in this chapter to the last clip of this session to depict how emotional experience
comes to the fore when anxiety becomes manageable.
In the following sections, we explore defenses that make up the ambivalent/resistant pattern. We
present specific pathways of interventions, and how therapist common reactivities and metaskills may

come into play.
Working With Defenses Against Emotion: Emotionality as a Defense Against Emotion
All that glitters is not gold: Emotionality as a defense vs. emotion: feeling and reeling but not
dealing. (Fosha, 2000b, pp. 158–159)
Distinguish emotionality from core emotion. Patients who struggle with patterns of ambivalent/resistant
attachment often experience emotion with a mixture of anxiety, which is emotionality. Emotion activates
the need for regulated contact, and the absence of regulated and regulating contact early on becomes
embedded in the patient’s nervous system, which mobilizes in excess as hyperactivation. When some
patients begin to engage in psychotherapy, the process can simultaneously trigger the fear of needing
help and worries that nothing can help, or alternately, the fear that there will never be enough of what
they need or want. These fears, and similar worries from their personal life, can instigate the onset of
emotion driven by anxious thoughts. The intensity of anxiety-motored thinking is characterized by
negative appraisals of self or others, catastrophic scenarios, and tangential and fragmented themes,
which are often more generalized than specific. This mixture generates emotionality rather than
emotion. Emotionality does not move in waves that arc and complete, the way adaptive core emotion
does. Rather, emotionality tends to be draining, cyclical, unrelenting. Core emotion arises from the body,
it surges and moves outward, and brings vitality and adaptive action. Emotionality is a defense against
emotion that takes our patients away from core emotion rather than allowing it to flow and move
toward completion and the release of adaptive action on behalf of the self.
Therapist common reactivities. When the patient’s emotional expression contains a mixture of tears,
protest, and/or anxious thoughts, we are in the terrain of emotionality. The therapist may notice feeling
unmoved and even turned off by the patient’s expression. Such a reaction is an indication that we are in
the presence of defensive emotion (i.e., emotionality) rather than genuine emotion or core emotion.
Core emotion has the quality of drawing one in, where emotionality has the quality of something feeling
off and agitating. We identify a therapist common reactivity here, because sometimes our feeling like
pulling away rather than moving toward can lead therapists to doubt ourselves, wondering about our
own capacity for empathy. Yet, it is a signal that psychotherapists must notice and pay attention to.
“How is it that my patient’s experience isn’t affecting me and stirring my sense of caring and wanting to
be helpful?” Questioning our experience of not feeling impacted by the patient is important, and as soon
as we become aware, we can look more closely at what is occurring between us and within our patient.
Perhaps their tears are leaking rather than flowing. Or their emotions are flatlining or static rather than
moving. Our lack of feeling impacted might be a signal that we are caught in an eddy with our patient,
circling around and around, reeling with them. Here our work is to recognize the emotionality so we can
get our bearings and become centered ourselves so as to be able to help our patient to connect to their
genuine emotion and core affective experience.
Discern among thinking, feeling, and empathizing with core affect. When anxiety-motored thoughts are
driving emotionality, a big issue involves the confusion between thoughts and feelings. Many individuals
do not know the difference between them. For instance, the thought, “he is going to leave me” triggers
attachment anxiety, and yet this is not a body-based emotional experience but an activating thought
that is threatening. Patients build these thoughts into worrisome predictions about the future (i.e.,
catastrophizing), leaving themselves churning and feeling helpless. The therapist might find themselves
exhausted and confused or checked out. Thinking takes the patient’s attention into their head and into
the stories that spin round and around. These stories are a defense against emotion as they keep the
patient overly focused on the content of their complaints and thus obscure what might be stirring in
their body.
It is important for us as therapists to learn the difference between thought-driven, anxiety-motored
emotion and visceral, bodily based emotion. And once we know it, teach it to our patients. Many
patients believe they are sharing feelings when they say, “I feel that they . . . don’t love me anymore, is

going to fire me, is going to leave me.” Just because a sentence starts with “I feel,” doesn’t make it a
feeling. When we hear content behind the words “I feel,” we may need to help our patients to notice
when they say, “I feel that …,” that they end up in a thought stream. Therapists must identify the
specificity of feeling words versus thinking words and help patients to become discerning. With some
patients it can be helpful to name the categorical emotions of sadness, anger, fear, joy, disgust, and
surprise. Some appreciate having a list that gives examples of mild, moderate, and intense feeling
words and they use it to learn to identify the emotional currents of their body-based experience. From
here, we focus on the somatic edge of core affect and help the patient to identify and stay with what is
happening in their body. We help them to notice what crests and falls, surges and wanes, arises and
dissipates. No matter how small or large the wave of affect, we want to help our patient learn to
recognize how affect moves, so then together we can be with these affective experiences. As we feel
emotion together in our present therapeutic relationship, relevant historical memories can surface and
we can link the current trigger with its early life disturbance or trauma.
Bottomless emotionality vs. productive core emotion. I once had a patient describe that after a fight
with her boyfriend, she cried “all night long” and became very ill. She was convinced that nearing her
emotions in our session was undesirable. And yet, as we explored her experience, it became evident
that the way she spoke to herself through the night led her into a hyperactivated state with no release.
As she relayed what happened, she took lots of short inhales, and her eyes, still puffy, filled with tears
without spilling over into any kind of letting go. As she and I spoke together, we approached the injury
between she and her boyfriend with a keen eye to her direct experience of hurt and anguish. With my
support and encouragement, she was able to cry with full breath and a sense of movement through her
core. This release became a vivid example of the difference between time-limited productive emotion
and unrelenting, endless, bottomless emotionality (a defense against productive core emotion).
Productive emotion moves in waves that arc and flow to some experience of completion, whereas
unrelenting emotionality is exactly that, unrelenting and with no end.
Bundled emotions. Sometimes there can be more than one emotion in the mix of the patient’s
experience. When the patient is protesting the absence of their historic caregiver, or current loved one,
they might feel both angry and sad. They are easily triggered by the unreliability or lack of follow-
through of loved ones, whether it be by what happened with their parent while they were growing up or
what just happened with their partner yesterday. Bundled emotions refer to the co-arising of more than
one emotion and may occur as the patient describes a complex set of feelings that are part of their
attachment wounding. While they are longing for the parent who has been so hard to reach, they are
also angry and protesting the absence of this parent’s response—their emotions appear as a bundle.
First, it is helpful to ask the patient to slow down and make room to notice the emotions in their body
and begin to name them one at a time.
Defensive affects. Second, we can ask the patient to feel into the emotion and together we notice what
emotion is strongest. Here, it might be that the patient is actually feeling angry and then shifts to
sadness. The shift to sadness may be serving as a defense against anger and can be understood as
watering down their anger. Or anger may be covering up longing that brings more vulnerability and
reminders of times when they were alone and untended. By bringing attention to what is happening we
can help patients to discern what emotion is coming from the core and learn to recognize when emotion
is serving as a defense.
Working With Defense Against Relatedness: Relational Preoccupation as a Defense Against Relatedness
Similar to emotionality as a defense against emotion, the person being other focused reflects a defense
that moves against relatedness and closeness, not a manifestation of them. When the patient’s
attention is focused on the other, to what the other is doing or not doing, they are often erecting a wall
of complaint or a justification about something they wanted that was not forthcoming. Such emphasis
about the other is the terrain of relational preoccupation, and often coincides with hyperactivation of

their attachment system. Yet as they maintain their inner eyes and ears on the other, the patient is not
noticing what is happening within themselves. Invariably what is absent is the patient’s attunement to
their own self experience. And ironically, their preoccupation with the other may obscure them from
seeing and understanding what is actually happening with the other, which blocks their capacity for
relatedness.
Here is where the fallout described in the descriptions of the early caregiver–infant interactions
comes into view. Having developed a keen focus on the other, the patient is remiss to notice and
respond to their own signals. Thus, relational preoccupation is actually a defense against awareness of
what is stirred from within. Seeking attention from the other circumvents their being present and
available to their own self. Additionally, their overactive complaint and protest is more likely to drive the
other away rather than draw them close.
Differentiate between self and other. To begin here, it is important to help the patient differentiate
between Self and Other. When the boundary between Self and Other is confused, often the care the
patient is longing for from the other is sorely needed from themselves. An important intervention is to
present opportunities for our patients to learn to distinguish what’s happening inside, in their own body-
based experience, from their predictions and reactions about what’s happening with another person. We
must help them to reel in their attention, to focus inwardly and develop interest in self-discovery. We
help them learn to identify what in their experience may be triggered. For someone with an ambivalent
pattern of attachment, reminders of inconsistency and unreliability are especially activating and typically
set off expectancies that formed their internal working models. These expectancies often hold themes
of self as unworthy and incapable and the other as inconsistent and unreliable. Helping patients to
differentiate between self and other is a way to steer them toward what is wounded and unresolved in
themselves and in need of tending. I do so with compassion, helping them to realize that
hyperactivating to get the attention of the other arises out of a best adaptive strategy they developed
as a child, related to their primary attachment relationship.
Lean into self experience and what stirs from within. Boundary confusion is part of the composite of the
preoccupied state of mind. What is missing is often a sense of what belongs to whom. When the patient
is outwardly focused on the other, they are actually avoiding their internal experience—and is
unavailable to recognize the difference between stimulus and response. We can help them to identify
the behavior of the other as the stimulus, and to see that their affective response belongs to them.
When they identify what arises as their own, they are closer to being able to connect to the genuine
feelings that may be triggered and unresolved from earlier in life. It prompts the question, whose
responsibility is it to tend to the child within an adult, whose caregivers were unreliable and left them
unsure whether their needs would be heard and tended to?
In the preoccupied state of mind, the tendency to predict and project what is to come in the future,
perseverations about others’ perceptions and intentions, is driven by fear and anxiety. Usually, these
future predictions are based on events that happened in the past, and anxiety regulation and getting
connected to what is occurring in the present moment is essential for treatment.
Working With Emotion and Core Affective Experience
At the bottom of the TOE is core affective experience, which includes categorical emotions, and
relational and self-affective experiences. Specific work with the experience of attachment in the here
and now of the therapist–patient relationship is crucial for undoing aloneness and attending to the
patient’s expectancies related to their early attachment wounding. As well, how we are explicit within
our attachment relationship is part of dyadic regulation and one of the ways we help our patients to
manage anxiety. Once we have regulated anxiety and built a coordinate therapeutic relationship, we can
help our patients approach signals of genuine emotion and self-affective experiences that are part of
what emerges at the bottom of the TOE and work with AEDP State 2.
Here, while working with patients who have patterns of ambivalent/resistant attachment it is helpful
to identify self-affective experiences. Self-affective experiences can be encapsulated by an enlarged

description of authentic self experience: having a felt sense of authenticity—the experience of feeling
“real”; the experience of vulnerability; emergent experiences of will, agency, and desire; and emergent
experiences of feeling lovable and worthy (Russell, 2021). Such self experiences and expression grow in
our patients as we help them to learn to both, take in our care and turn their attention inward, to
regulate anxiety, and to build their capacity for recognizing what is happening in their own experience
and then processing that to completion. Learning to take their eye off of the other for soothing and for
evidence of mattering, listening inside, they begin to develop their agentic self (Russell, 2021), who is
capable to recognize what is happening in their own felt experience and how to tend to their own
needs.
Another core affective experience is ego-state work and their related emotions. Many of our patients
with unresolved attachment wounding have younger aspects of self that hold unresolved emotional
experiences. Often these parts are cut off and outside of our patients’ conscious awareness. In the next
clinical example, we return to a final clip from Vignette 10A. The patient and therapist, having regulated
the patient’s initial anxiety, are approaching the emergence of emotion after contacting a younger
aspect of the patient’s self. It is unsettling for Megan to feel into the magnitude of her emotion. The
therapist’s acknowledgment and validation turns out to be regulating and strengthening for the patient.
Vignette 10A, Part 3: “Feels Like the Sadness Will Never End”
PT: It’s like if I approach the stuff at all, I just get so sad. [My comment about noticing what lies
underneath the tension and fast heart rate: signals of anxiety and apprehension touched
the patient and she shares what she feels.]
TH: Right. Are you feeling sad right now as you start to get there? [Being in the present moment
and checking what she is aware of right now.]
PT: Yes . . . ugh. I just, like it feels like the sadness will never end. Like every time I, like, interact with
this stuff, it’s just like . . . (hands up in the air, a gesture of giving up) [Here, she names what is
unresolved is “always” there. Our aim for the session is to regulate and help her
experience safety so she and I can help her to face what ultimately needs to be
processed.]
Her response is right on cue. Underneath the anxiety, in the heart of her 8-year-old self, lies sadness.
And the sadness is old and overwhelming, and has probably been there a long time. She fears the
sadness will never end. Here exactly is our work: to help her learn how to be with herself and me,
helping her to first undo aloneness, and then feel safe enough to explore and process her feelings
toward the unresolved wounding she suffered and endured, until now.
TH: Let’s see what the sadness wants to bring today. And, you know, I know that many of us have a lot
of sadness about stuff from childhood. And I also know that what seems endless can find its way into
enoughness—enough recognition, calm enough. So I have faith that there is an end, which may not
yet be in sight. [I try to normalize her fear and provide reassurance: I trust what seems
like too much can find a way to be manageable. Therapist as older, wiser other, one who
knows.]
PT: (nodding, wiping her eyes, one eye at a time)
TH: (looking tenderly, hand on heart) Ultimately, the goal here in some way is for you to come to terms.
Right? And right now the sadness is saying, “I’m not done. This is just so deeply, disturbingly sad
because my life has been so affected by this too much now.” [Empathy with the core affective
experience.]
PT: (nodding, eyes closed, smiling, wiping tears)
TH: Am I saying too much?
PT: No. That’s exactly right. That’s why I’m crying. Okay. [Click of recognition; helps the patient
make sense of her tears, which settles her; helps the therapist know that she is being
received.]

TH: I want to be here to hold this with you so it stays manageable. [Going beyond mirroring to
helping; explicit offer of undoing aloneness.]
PT: Thank you.
Emerging core affective experience. When a patient becomes more capable of regulating anxiety, they
are more likely to access core affective experience. However, sometimes the emergence of emotion
leads to heightened arousal. In the above vignette, our work going back and forth to regulate anxiety,
making room for experience, and establishing a coordinated therapeutic alliance created a stabilizing
base of support for our work to proceed step-by-step. The therapist reflects the patient’s experience by
connecting the patient’s sadness with her younger self and normalizes its emergence as evidence of
unresolved material. The patient experiences a click of recognition, which helps her to name “this is why
I’m crying.” Feeling seen leads the patient to self-understanding, which furthers her sense of being
okay. By approaching the emotion together that has been held inside alone and untended, alongside her
recognition of where the sadness comes from, is regulating, which is a step in building her capacity to
feel, bear, and process emotional pain. Next, we take one more step to make explicit the relational
experience between us.
TH: I have an idea. Take a peek at me and see me. Like, how do you see me? How am I being here with
you? [Make the relational explicit.]
PT: Attentively, calmly.
TH: Okay. Attentive and calm in the present. And what message do you get about yourself from me?
[Metaprocess the impact of my relational presence on her self experience.]
PT: That’s just that what I’m doing is acceptable. [Building self-confidence.]
TH: Totally. That’s a great message to get. [Affirming.]
PT: Yes.
Our dyad is coordinating and being effective, which is establishing the conditions for the patient to
experience a felt sense of security in our togetherness for the psychotherapy ahead.
Thus far, we have interpreted what has unfolded in the session in terms of the TOE. We now move
to the next schema to see what revelations it has in store for us. The ambivalent Self–Other–Emotion
(SOE) triangle provides a schema to depict our internal working models. Additionally, we show the self-
at-best and self-at-worst versions, to help psychotherapists organize our work when self-at-worst is at
play and our patient’s defensive strategies need attention.
The SOE Triangle (With Embedded TOE): Ambivalent/Resistant
The SOE triangle depicts a person’s internal working model: the individual’s internalized representation
of self, their internalized representation of other, and their internalized representation of how emotion is
processed. We have discussed two versions of the SOE triangle: self-at-best and self-at-worst (Chapters
3 and 8). On the ambivalent SOE triangle (see Figure 10.2), a self-at-worst constellation, the patient’s
internalized representation of the triggering other is characterized by the preoccupied state of mind of
their caregiver, and by their caregiver’s behavioral hallmarks of inconsistency, unreliability, and being
abandoning through their self-absorption. The other is represented as abandoning/unreliable. The
individual’s internalized representation of their compromised self is characterized by ambivalence and/or
resistance. The self is represented as inadequate/unworthy. Their internalized representation of emotion
is characterized by dysregulation: affective competence (or lack thereof) of feeling and reeling, but not
dealing; the representation of emotion often being unmanageable.
When an individual is reminded of their caregiver’s hallmark behaviors or state of mind, they often
become activated and may engage hyperactivating strategies with a significant other, as if still trying to
get their caregiver’s attention. They may seek soothing yet resist receiving what is offered. They usually
become dysregulated. When patients come into psychotherapy and describe a repetitive encounter with
an intimate other with whom they “lost it” and an escalated, disturbing conflict ensued, we have a clue
that our patient was hyperactivated and became dysregulated. While the patient may feel dismayed and

embarrassed, we can hold knowing that from here we may find an opening to their underlying
attachment trauma, and even more, a route to corrective experience that can foster deep change.


Figure 10.2 The Self–Other–Emotion Triangle (With Embedded Triangle of Experience): Ambivalent/Resistant
Pando-Mars, 2024, adapted from Diana Fosha, 2020
AEDP Maxim 8, Working With the Self-at-Worst From Under the Aegis of the Self-at Best (Fosha,
2000), was illustrated by the above vignette. As therapist and patient began to develop a collaborative
therapeutic relationship in our first session together, we established new grounds upon which to help
the patient have an effective experience of self and a realistic experience of other. Through our
coordinated efforts, we were setting conditions for Megan to generate new expectancies of self, other,
and emotion, which continued throughout her treatment. A therapeutic relationship is not established at
once and for all but is constantly renewed, revised, and reestablished as patients grow and what they
need from us changes (Russell, 2018).
Thereby, as psychotherapists explicitly tend to how we form our dyads with patients, we help them
orient to the present moment from which to face the aftermath of historical trauma, making the work of
psychotherapy possible. By offering our presence, attunement, and availability to help, we pave the way
for our patients to cultivate self-at-best: having an internal representation of an effective Self, the
capacity for a realistic internal representation of other, and a representation of emotions as accessible
and capable of being regulated enough to be processed with the company of an Other. Thus, we help
them begin the process of transforming their internal working models.
For some of our patients with this pattern, who are leaning toward resistance, we may need a more
targeted focus to help build our coordinated therapeutic relationship, which we address in the following
section.
Building Receptive Affective Capacity
Although ambivalent/resistant patients tend to be externally focused and reliant on others, some
patients actually need considerable help with learning to take in care from another and be able to use it
to regulate themselves and calm their nervous system. Early experiences of abandonment or lack of
consistent attention by self-absorbed caregivers have left a significant dearth of trust that anyone would
want to be there for them or can provide them with enough of what they need. There can be significant
doubt in the sincerity of the motivating intention behind gestures of care. In more extreme cases,
stubborn bouts of angry resistance deflect such offers and exemplify defenses against relatedness and
defenses against emotion, all in one.
The therapist may need to take deliberate steps to help these patients to actually make use of the
therapist, even when it is hard to do so. For instance, it is important to help the patient recognize when
they rebuff offers of care and help, and that such a strategy is reflexive and protective against the
disappointment and fear of being missed, misunderstood, and left to be de facto alone with their
distress. The therapist may need to keep reminding the patient to slow down, to listen in, and to pay
attention to their experience. Besides penetrating their wall of words to help them to access their
somatically based experience, we may need to help our patients learn how to recognize and make use
of our presence, care, and responsiveness.
When asking a patient to slow down to emphasize that I am listening, I will say, “I hear you.” When
an individual expects not to be heard or seen, being explicit with this message is medicinal. Perhaps
also needed is to be explicit, saying, “I am here with you.” Yet here ambivalence may arise. Ambivalence
is the direct result of inconsistency, so it need not be a surprise to psychotherapists when working with
someone with the ambivalent/resistant pattern. The patient might respond with “You can give me what
I need now, when I am in your office, but can I count on you when I really want your help, when I
need you on my time frame?” For the person who is externally focused, conflict arises between
receiving what is offered during a psychotherapy session and transferring that to a moment of need
when they are on their own time. The delicate edge is the truth that we do meet on a schedule. Our
availability is most reliable at our set place and time. The challenge, and yet the key, is for us to
understand that the ambivalent dismissing of our here-and-now presence also represents their doubt in
their own capacity to hold our care when we are not physically with them. The person struggling with
the need for external regulation may well be lacking enough stable internal structure that can hold
constancy.

Fortunately, this hails the work of AEDP Maxim 5, Check for the Patient’s Receptive Affective
Capacity. When the therapist provides contact and care with stability and predictability and makes a
practice of checking in with the patient, we show the patient our serious intention for them to feel our
presence and to begin to internalize something of how we understand them, and to notice their felt
experience when they receive our care. And yet, ambivalence may show up when the therapist checks
for the patient’s receptive capacity. For example, when the therapist offers support and withness to
undo aloneness and follows up with a relational intervention, such as “Can you feel me with you?,”
some patients with an ambivalent/resistant pattern might initially respond with a “maybe” or weak
“yes.” They might follow with an explanation like “But then I will always have to do this entirely by
myself” or “That’s only here, can I take you home with me?”
The dual-prong goal is to have both. I want to help patients notice what they can receive, and to
notice what happens when they can’t. This usually means that an early attachment strategy is
activated, and something needs holding and to be known. When the therapist can meet such a place
with interest and steady attention, we are overlaying a new experience of receptivity on an old
experience of “something missing.” When ambivalent patients receive this quality of care, and they
experience it repeatedly with us, we begin to provide an experience of being reliable in contrast to the
inconsistency they experienced and grew to anticipate. When we metaprocess the new experience of
the patient’s feeling seen and helped, they can begin to realize when they feel met and soothed.
Staying with the felt experience of calm or comfort, we encourage them to saturate in the new
experience. Absorbing the experience helps them to register their Self’s need for connection, and the
felt experience of being met by the Other. I am always delighted when patients tell me how they had a
conversation with me in their head during the week, or how they thought of me when they knew they
needed to calm down. Bringing me to mind is clearly a transitional experience that leads to the capacity
to self-regulate.
I recall one of my patients with a hyperactivating strategy who was on the edge of panic during one
of the fires in Northern California. She worried about the impact of smoke inhalation. We worked
together in the session to help her to regulate, by tuning into her body and being mindful of her
moment-to-moment activation and focusing on what she needed to do to feel calm. At the end of the
session she said, “Can I take you home in my pocket?”
A version of this question often arises from someone who externally regulates. They might feel “I
can do this with you, but what about when I’m alone or you are not there or . . .” When the above
patient wanted to take me home with her, I heard her need to feel my support when we were physically
apart. Here, we were able to engage the power of portrayal work to enable the patient to internalize my
care and presence for her to feel capable of self-regulating when needed. To enhance this integration, I
invited her to see how she would do so in the imaginal play of a mini portrayal. By describing her
physical experience of relaxation and pairing it with seeing me, we lit up the neural networks in the
brain to connect her experience in her body with her picture of me in her mind.
THERAPIST (TH): “How do you want to do that?”
PATIENT (PT): “I’m looking at you and noticing how I feel. My body feels more still. I feel warm. My face
here (hands strokes her cheeks), my jaw feels some warmth. My belly feels soft . . . a heaviness,
some tiredness, but the heaviness is relaxation.
TH: Mm-hmm.
PT: The visual—your brown hair has a glisten to it, and the silvery bluish shawl on your back, your smile,
glasses, and I can feel the warmth in your eyes. [Filling in sensory details.]
TH: Through the glasses. (smiling)
PT: Yeah, through the glasses! (smiling) I almost feel like when I leave, I can remember . . . I’m making
it a resource, or something like a vision. [Internalizing the experience.]
TH: I like that you are pairing what you see to how you feel, pairing the culmination of the work we’ve
done here today. I’m feeling connected to you and imagining that is what your process is noticing . . .
“How do I transition this to myself, letting me in or taking me with you?” [I give words to what I
imagine is going on in her mind.]
PT: Right. Connection is a good antidote or medicine for the anxiety.

TH: Awesome . . . spell that out.
PT: As I said, it could be with myself, as a scaffold, connecting with you or asking to connect in with N.
[her friend] to help me soothe.
TH: So feel that.
PT: Yeah.
TH: Let yourself register that in your body and see how that is with you.
PT: (deep exhale) Thank you . . . I’ll see you soon. [Marking the end of our session.]
The patient paired being with me with the relaxed feeling in her body and took that with her to
remember during the week. Herein is the practice to cultivate building a new kind of internal
representation, to consciously make a connection that she can call upon as needed, growing confidence
in her capacity to self-regulate. Recalling the movie Lion, which was described in Chapter 4, we can see
that the psychotherapeutic use of portrayals, of bringing to mind an internalized picture of the other, is
making use of an instinctual mechanism that 5-year-old Saroo called upon naturally. When he was lost
and alone in Calcutta, one night under a bridge Saroo brought images to mind of his beloved mother
and cherished older brother. When he was missing them, he drew upon his memories of their love.
Although lost from his family, he held them close in his heart. What a poignant example of self-
regulation: Saroo having an internalized representation of his mother and brother to call upon when he
needed soothing.
While treating patients who are healing from insecure attachment, we help them to restore a felt
sense of security. We do so by applying the mechanisms of what happens naturally in secure
attachment when development goes right. Like in the above example, we can reinforce healing by
helping our patients practice these natural mechanisms, building their capacity to self-right when
development has left some gaps.
In the case of someone who seeks comfort externally, I want to foster deepening their receptive
capacity. I begin by letting the patient experience the shift that occurs through our dyadic regulation,
emphasizing paying attention to signals of arousal, noticing their experience of being accompanied,
undoing aloneness, finding ways to ground, and to take in soothing and care. Receiving the message “I
am here with you” and can go with you, can counter the old experience of feeling left alone, unassisted
to cope. Then, when the next fear arises (“But what about when I go home?”), we find ways that fit for
them to call on us through their imaginal experience. The emergence of my patient’s longing to take me
with her shows what is possible. She can hold her new connection between her relaxed body, which we
have cultivated through our work together, paired with my face and countenance—which she now
knows she can call upon at any moment. This is integration: taking the effects of our work home and
remembering that she is not alone, she has my help, and is discovering ways she can bring soothing
and comfort online as needed.
When the Resistant Side of the Ambivalent/Resistant Pattern Is More
Pronounced
In the next section I discuss a vignette taken from a midtreatment session with a patient, Soraya,
whose experiential process reflected more of the angry/resistant aspect of the ambivalent/resistant
pattern. Her parents were divorced and her childhood years with her mother were difficult. Her mother
was extremely self-centered and inconsistent in her caregiving. In current time, the patient was
preoccupied with her boss at work and unhappy in her marriage, feeling ineffective to establish clear
expectations and boundaries both at work and at home. In one of our psychotherapy sessions, we were
discussing her mixed feelings about psychotherapy, and she said, “The trouble with healing is that it lets
my mother off the hook.”
The vignette illustrates some of the challenges of working with a patient who is struggling with
resistance, and how it plays out with the therapist and within herself as she encounters the potential of
connecting with a younger part of herself. Some pathogenic affects emerge, alongside the anger of
angry resistance turned inward. We enter the session as Soraya reveals a memory of being alone at

night at the age of 6 or 7. As her psychotherapist I aim steadily to see if we can connect with this
younger self who seems stuck in the unbearable aloneness of her unresolved attachment trauma.
Vignette 10B: Reunion With Abandoned Self—Developing Self-Action Tendencies
SORAYA (PATIENT, PT): . . . going in circles over and over about the scenario. [She describes her
preoccupation at work.]
THERAPIST (TH): Hmm. What about that? Where do you think that comes from in you? [Shift to
exploring.]
PT: Well, sometimes I, I blame my mother, I just think about how I remember just even at like age 6 or
7 in my bed at night just crying myself to sleep, my mother oblivious, and me just worrying about
things, just worrying, and worrying and worrying . . . [Early preoccupation]
TH: Ohh (empathic tone), can we go in and be with that little 6 year old in you and help that part of you
get tended to? Because I think that’s the part where you were so alone. Right? [Active stance to
offer experiential portrayal work to help her to connect with her younger self.]
PT: (nodding, eyes shift from looking at me to looking up, fill with tears, mouth pushes out) [Such a
feeling response]
TH: Mmm, seems like that part just, you know, just be with (hand to heart). Let’s make some space,
you’re so available, seems that part is so available right now. [Deep empathy]
PT: (closes eyes, nods)
TH: (nods, and head tilts to the left, exhales audibly) Yeah, just let the feelings be here, let’s be with
you. (slow quiet voice, spacious) What are you noticing?
PT: (wiping tears, therapist passes tissues) Well, it’s just absurd (angry, hard tone of voice).
The possibility of tending to herself evokes anger. At first Soraya appears moved by the possibility of
tending to a younger part of herself who was so alone. Her response, nodding, tears, and eye contact
show positive signals of coordination. However, when I ask what she is noticing, she moves to a
defensive protest against her situation, thus revealing anger, and possibly resistance. The discrepancy
between Soraya’s nonverbal expression and what she says, demonstrates how the right brain can be
ahead of the left brain. Right brain to right brain, she seems to be taking in my caring attention, more
than her left brain, full of old preoccupied beliefs, will admit.
TH: What? What are you feeling? [Redirect her attention from protest to affect.]
PT: How alone I was . . . (voice is softer) [Which feels more connected to her affective
experience]
TH: Yeah (nodding, eyes close as if receiving something, then open), yeah.
PT: Like how can that be going on, you know? [Puzzled protest]
As the patient is faced with feeling with herself and for herself, she also gets in touch with her disbelief
and anger at the fact she was so alone, which I validate.
TH: Right. So let’s try to be with that because I, you know, there’s this absurd. I feel . . . how
outrageous. I mean . . . [Empathic joining and elaboration of the impact of being alone.]
PT: (nodding) Right (eyes close). [She acknowledges feeling seen by the therapist.]
TH: And so that little one there, can we like really be with her, and see what we can? [Taking the lead
and focusing the patient, aiming to bring attention and care to her younger self who was
so alone.]
PT: I just feel like I’m gonna like die . . . if I think about it too much . . . [feeling leads to reeling] like
I’m just going to crumble. [Fearing a maladaptive affective response]
TH: Part of what’s happening, I think, is that if we don’t let you think about it, then she actually gets
abandoned [Encouraging patient to think about her feelings.]
PT: Right (nodding more emphatically), right. [Coordinates with therapist]

TH: Because then she’s alone again. [Feeling compassion for the younger part she
acknowledged was so alone, therapist reaches out explicitly—taking the lead.] So what I
actually want to have happen is, you know, for us to be, like for you to let her see if she can feel me.
[Therapist checks for the receptive affective capacity of the younger self to undo
aloneness and offer a psychological hand of support.]
PT: Yeah.
TH: Because the worry is like the signal that she’s there, that part of you is there.
PT: Yeah. Right.
TH: And you actually did make it through, right? [Speaking to the adult self to acknowledge that
she knows she survived into adulthood, which her younger self, who is “stuck in the
past,” doesn’t know.]
PT: (exhales sharply) Right.
TH: That younger part of you doesn’t know it. I think because she’s been cordoned off for survival.
Right. So we kind of have to let her be seen, too. [Being explicit about the intention to undo
her aloneness and differentiate the past from the present moment.]
PT: (nodding)
TH: What’s that like? What’s happening when I say this?
PT: Umm. Yeah, I mean, part of me just doesn’t want to go back there. I mean, obviously that feels
horrible to say, “Oh, I’m not going to go back there, just going to leave you on your own.” [Her
ambivalence displays an inner conflict: resistance.]
Think about feelings. When the patient, Soraya, is able to acknowledge what she feels and has a chance
to put it into dialogue with me, she engages her reflective capacity, which helps her to consider what
she is actually saying, and also how that might feel to her younger self. The intervention for patients
with ambivalent/resistant attachment is to think about feelings, in contrast to asking patients with
avoidant attachment to feel into thoughts. Soraya did not have the experience of an attachment figure
who was paying attention to the impact of their behavior on her. So for her to consider the impact of
her behavior on her younger self is actually groundbreaking.
TH: (nodding, looking serious) That’s what the poor thing had to do for so long. [Explicit empathy]
PT: (nodding)
TH: Do you have an image of her? An image of that part of you? [Bypassing the defense]
PT: (low voice) Yeah . . .
TH: I wonder if we could just be with a little, you know, just try to take it step-by-step. So not like
submerge you in overwhelming pain because it’s too unbearable. It was so unbearable that you had
to cut it off. [Asking permission and titrating to find her window of tolerance.]
PT: I just picture my room and I just picture a little girl sitting on the bed and I picture, but not in great
detail, a little girl. Oh, and then I picture that I had a sliding glass door. [Green signals, she is
entering her imaginal channel of experience.] And so I picture that being open and these white
billowy drapes (eyes get large) that I didn’t have, um, just blowing in and out [transformance] and
back and forth. Um, almost like an abandoned home, you know. [Specificity and the more vivid
the scene enhances portrayal work.]
TH: Mm-hmm, yeah . . .
PT: Like, no one’s there (blows her nose) to close the . . . it’s windy and no one’s closing . . . (trails off)
TH: Yeah (eyes furrowing, head leaning in), oh (caring tone).
PT: Like, just abandoned, like, just abandoned.
TH: Yeah. [These para-verbal utterances communicate therapist “withness” and presence
offering comfort with soothing tones of voice.]
PT: Even though I’m sitting on a bed, the carpet’s still there and all the furniture’s still there.
TH: But it really kind of gives that feeling of no one’s there and this little girl is all alone. I wonder if you
can put yourself in the picture as an adult, if you can go to her. [Reunion/rescue portrayal]
PT: I can. (voice tone gets high, wipes tear from eye) But then I just feel I’m not good enough. [Her
feeling unworthy comes to light.]

When the adult self feels unworthy to go to the younger self. This may have been too big of a step for
the patient, which can happen when the sense of insecurity and lack of self-confidence is strong and the
patient is stuck in a self-at-worst self experience of not being enough. We could shift our exploration
and focus on unblending, which is a technique for separating out two parts of the self that is used by
Schwartz (1997; Schwartz & Sweezy, 2019) in internal family systems, and by Napier (1996) to help
patients differentiate their present-day adult self from a younger self. Proceeding with unblending, I
would help Soraya lean into what she has grown and developed as her adult self who is capable at work
and responsible for her two small children. I could have her see her younger self and notice how she
feels about her, to establish what indeed might be a necessary next step. However, in this moment, I
choose to accompany Soraya and to explore her feeling of not being good enough. I am sensing some
pathogenic self-state needs accompanying and regulating.
TH: Well, now you need to take me with you so we can be with you. [Extending myself as a
relational bridge.] What’s the feeling of you’re not good enough? Where does that come from?
[Exploring this self-at-worst compromised self.]
PT: Just the feeling like I don’t. I don’t want to go get her. I want someone who’s happier, more sure of
herself . . . [Self-doubt and insecure attitude come in, and yet she does say how she wants
to feel.]
TH: Oh, Soraya . . . (sad voice) ohh. [Empathy for her experience]
PT: (sniffs, eyes closed, looks forlorn, looks down) Yeah. I just feel yucky.
TH: Yeah. What’s the yucky feeling? Can you just say more to me? [Engaging with receptivity and
acceptance to help patient regulate her shame.]
PT: I just feel ashamed and yucky. [When I hear “yucky” I think of disgust and the toxicity of
unresolved trauma.]
TH: Where does yucky feel in your body? [Somatic exploration]
PT: My stomach . . .
TH: Yeah. What does it feel like in there? [Encouraging her to identify her experience.]
PT: (hand moves to jaw) . . . and my jaw.
TH: In your jaw.
PT: Just anxious, actually. Just tight. [Labeling somatic elements can be regulating.]
TH: Tight.
PT: Tight, and butterflies.
TH: (nodding) So what happens when you look at me and how do you see me with you right now?
[Using my presence in an attempt to contact her and offer dyadic regulation, to be “in it
together.”]
PT: Mm, yeah. I see you as gentle and kind, and that you’re lucky because you don’t have the yucky . . .
TH: Yeah, I’m lucky. (quizzical tone) What about my caring for you? (looks concerned) Can you feel my
caring for you? [I bypass the comparison—a relational defense—and redirect to offering
care and checking her receptive affective capacity.]
PT: (quick nods)
TH: Can that little girl feel my caring for you?
PT: (nods again) Yeah.
TH: Caring for you. Because that’s been so on my mind right now. [Making my relational care
explicit.]
PT: (looking toward therapist and away, tearing, nodding)
TH: I feel so tenderly toward you. I just want, want, you to be able to feel that, because you were so
alone. And it was just so outrageous for so long, you’re suffering from that. It wasn’t your fault. It
wasn’t your fault. [Platforming to let her know I really get how awful it was for her.]
PT: Right . . .
TH: And it developed this way in your brain that there’s this, like falling out sometimes.
PT: (deep exhale) [Some receptivity reveals itself in this deep exhale.] Yeah.
TH: (head is tilted over like I’m talking to the young one inside) And, and that’s part of, you know, what
I’m feeling like we need to bring in, you know, some caring in a deep way to that little one inside and

to you.
PT: (nodding) Oh, it’s funny, because, I mean, I do feel like we’re . . . I just don’t want to take people’s
shit anymore. I want to like, be able to stand up for myself. [Glimmer of transformance—reveals
her longing for self-action tendencies.] You know?
TH: Yeah. Yeah.
PT: That’s so hard.
TH: [Meeting her in this transformance, striving to find some capable self she can draw upon
to resource her.] And yet that’s kind of what you did the other day. [Affirm her recent
experience.]
PT: (nodding, eyes open wider) Right.
Checking for her receptive affective capacity. While explicitly providing relational accompaniment, I
helped the patient to explore her felt experience of not good enough, which was at the edge of a
maladaptive self experience and needed transforming. By holding my attention and care and checking in
with her experience in the present moment, Soraya nods that yes, both she and her younger self feel
my care, which is such an important antidote to shame (Kaufman, 1980/1992, 1996). As we deepen
into this experience, the patient has a shift and remarks how she doesn’t want to take people’s shit
anymore, which has the potential of a corrective self experience. My sense is that she has been taking
in something of my care and is feeling bolstered to recognize her choice about what she does take in.
It’s almost like instead of responding to receiving my care, she asserts what she doesn’t want. This
remark portends action on her own behalf, which mobilizes her. We processed more about her
experience of differentiating her assertion from her coworker’s response. And then she shifts back to
the portrayal.
PT: (nodding, face softens) Yeah, I’m trying to picture like a whole bunch of people [she reenters the
portrayal] encircling her, you know, people who are laughing and people who are happy, they’re
fighting in, you know, just encircling her . . .
TH: Yeah, good. [Affirming and goes right with her.]
PT: . . . and kind of lifting her up and floating, floating her out of there. [Spontaneous rescue
portrayal—taking her out of the unbearable situation.]
This is a huge shift. Soraya imagines encircling her younger self with a whole bunch of happy people.
How did this happen? One possibility is to see that we engaged in unblending her sense of not being
enough from a time when she was assertive and acting on her own behalf. I had highlighted that her
assertion may not have landed with the result she wanted, but that part wasn’t her fault. This
differentiation seemed to ignite her willingness to undo the aloneness of her younger self.
TH: What’s that like? How is she? [Metaprocessing to see how the young one is experiencing
this.]
PT: It feels like it will never be enough though. [After each step forward, another backward step
appears.] And that’s it, I mean I constantly need reassurance. [Said so quietly I don’t pick up on
this—otherwise that could have been a nice intervention—to see if we could go and
provide reassurance.]
TH: Hold on for a second. [Recognizing we’re taking a turn and wanting to regulate the feeling
of not enough.] What’s the visceral feeling of that? Let’s just be with you. [Noticing the
ambivalent defensive pattern of “never enough” has kicked back in.]
PT: It’s just that it feels so good (hand makes grasping gesture), and I can never get enough of it.
The ambivalent pattern expresses fear that they can never get enough. By keeping the interventions on
asking Soraya what’s happening in her body, we gain access to both what feels good, and what she
fears isn’t enough. This is ambivalence in action. Classic. Not able to take in the good feeling when she
fears it won’t be enough. In this vivid clinical moment we see what Mary Ainsworth (1978/2015)

observed about the difference between the ambivalent child, who fears they will never get enough of
what they want, in contrast to the avoidant child, who fears what they want. By carefully tracking what
occurs moment-to-moment, we have the opportunity to explore the resistance.
TH: Mm-hmm. What stops you, what’s not receiving that fully? [Exploring the defense] How does it
become not enough?
PT: Right, I guess. I guess I feel like I need more than my due share or my fair share. [Internal
working model—belief. By exploring the defense we get to its origin.]
TH: You certainly need more than you were ever given. [Making explicit that indeed, this was her
historical experience.]
PT: Right. (smiles and nods)
TH: Right, right. So part of you doesn’t even know what enough is. But my sense is that it has
something to do with being reliable and constant.
PT: (nods) Constant. [Repeating “constant,” she is considering . . .]
TH: You know, regular, like you can rely on it. [Elaborating the meaning of constant.]
PT: Yeah. Like I feel, you know, the little girl in the middle of all these arms around her and floating her
up [now she is back in the portrayal], and her just sort of drinking it in, but yeah, just feeling like
they’re going to go away or just like (voice trails off) I don’t know, I had something and I lost my
train of thought. [Ambivalent discourse of getting lost emerges on the precipice of the new
experience and the old worry.]
TH: And so that sense of on the one hand it feels so good, but then this fear that it’s not going to be
enough, that it’s going to go away. What would you say to that little girl? What can those arms say to
that little girl when she gets afraid that it’s not going to be enough? [Reentering the portrayal to
see if we can pick up where she left off.]
PT: Well, I’m stuck because I feel like, I don’t know. You grow up. You can’t always have all these
people surrounding you, doting on you. [Resistance kicks in—primarily out of her lack of
experience of being soothed, she is unable to give what she hasn’t received—so I step in
to offer help and provide a new message of comfort and reliability.]
TH: See, I want to say, “I’m always here.” [Scaffolding her experience.]
PT: (eyes open, nodding and gazing at me) [A nonverbal look of openness and receptivity.]
TH: That this image of all these hands supporting you, are always available to you, whatever you need
from me, whenever you need me, just close your eyes and I’ll be there. We’re always here for you.
You just have to ask. [Suggesting internalizing the image as a resource.]
PT: I feel like it. I need to. This . . . but it’s totally . . . It is the emptiness that I feel. I just imagine that
people who are my age and still can call their mother and feel better after talking to their mom, that
piece I’m just never going to get. [Reverts to old expectancy, and her pain, which emerges as
angry resistance.]
On the heels of the new experience her wounding emerges, bundled with angry resistance. Curiously, or
not really, given that we are working with a pattern of ambivalent/resistant, as we get closer to giving
Soraya’s younger self accompaniment and a way out of the past, she becomes helpless/hopeless about
what she didn’t get and how far away she feels from being able to come to resolution. Here again
notice right next to the possibility of comfort brings the ambivalence/resistance to it. In the next
section, some of Soraya’s verbal discourse is extreme. She actually says that to not receive care and
comfort at the right time in life, well, the person should not be living. I’ll save the detail for each reader
to discover in the transcript. Know that I see this as an important revelation of just how desperate and
hopeless Soraya feels. And by staying with her, undoing her aloneness, the power of transformance
does arise.
TH: Yeah. And that’s something you have to come to terms with, there’s a lot of grieving there, there’s a
sadness there . . .
PT: Right.

TH: That your mother’s just never going to be the kind of mother you wish you could have, and that’s
very, very sad. But that has nothing to do with you. That has to do with her. [Empathy and
distinguishing between what happened to her and who she is, building differentiation.]
PT: Right? But I just feel like I can’t reconcile, like I don’t feel like I can ever feel okay. [Pathogenic
affect]
TH: This feeling—that’s a fear.
PT: But I actually feel like people who don’t get that should be euthanized. [Although this is shocking
to hear, I continue to explore what drives her to say this.]
TH: People who don’t get what?
PT: You don’t get that right kind of core support because you can never get over it. [Extreme
hopelessness]
TH: I so disagree with you (shake my head side to side), I disagree with you there. (softly) [Stepping
in with a differentiated perspective.]
PT: I feel like I can’t ever get over it. [Example of an anxious thought expressed as a fact.]
TH: Right (gently), you worry that you can’t ever get over it. [I point out that this is a worry, not a
fact.]
PT: I want that feeling. I want that safety. I want that assuredness. [Transformance longing] Like
you get it at the right time, it’s like in your account, you know (eyes look down, fingertips press into
the couch). [Her longing arises, and fear is close behind.]
TH: Right—and that’s part of what we’re doing here. [Affirming the possibility of healing.]
PT: (looks at therapist, with worried eyes)
TH: There’s this . . . your brain has these pathways of deficits of what you didn’t get. [I move to
psycho-education—to encourage thinking about her feelings as a way to build new
possibilities.] But when I ask you if you can feel me and if you can take me in and you say, actually,
yes, I feel your care and I feel your kindness, you know, that starts to build new pathways that the
part of you who is so alone can actually start to register. There’s another way. (kind eyes and tender
voice)
Therapist takes the lead to affirm how change is not only possible but is actually happening. I am
affirming all of the positive steps I see Soraya is taking. Even though she presents defensive and
resistant patterns of thought, she is giving space to go to the younger self, to do a rescue portrayal
(lifting her out of the abandoned place). She is doing way more than she believes she is doing. Here I
am up against a potential therapist blind spot: to not get overwhelmed or agitated by Soraya’s
negativity but to hold my experience of the whole of the session. I know I am feeling patient. I have the
metaskills of firm and caring online. Despite how she stops the forward momentum to verbalize
something against herself after each step, I see how she keeps plugging away, stays engaged with me,
and returns to a next step. I hold this, which is so important for psychotherapists to recognize and
acknowledge “both/and.” Only by holding both can we help our patients not to get stuck in the polarity
of resistance.
PT: (nods, as if receiving and absorbing)
TH: And then I think there is grieving for one who felt so abandoned and really helping her to find
(pause, breath) how to take people in now via these new pathways that are getting developed.
[Therapist provides guidance for next steps.]
PT: I don’t know, I’m mad, and I just don’t want to—why should I have to live with this huge deficit?
[Angry resistance]
TH: See, I think part of the dilemma is there’s a fight. There’s a fight about really letting yourself receive
at the deepest level of caring that could heal some of that because there’s a part of you that’s so
mad. [I address the conflict of the angry resistance—remember her earlier comment that
for her to heal would mean letting her mother off the hook.]
PT: Right, right. [Click of recognition]
TH: That doesn’t want to let it in all the way.

PT: Right. Which I’m seeing like, today, I was really seeing that. Seeing how it came on, I want to hang
on to this, the awfulness of my past. [Here she is owning her resistance, which shows how
she is developing her self-reflective capacity.] Is it time?
TH: It is.
PT: (sits up) Time of my childhood, like, yeah.
TH: Yeah. So that’s really good to see. [Affirming the possibility of being empowered by the
understanding of her reflection.]
PT: Hmm. Okay.
TH: I mean, it’s painful, but I think it’s important to recognize.
PT: Yeah, I think this was valuable. I think I was hoping to feel more, more resolved, more solved, more
like, I’ll leave here now and I won’t have . . . Everybody will respect me. But . . . [The conflict
between what wasn’t enough and what she got!]
TH: Right. But I think that while I want that for you, I think that the truth of today might have—it’s kind
of like that slower, but faster.
PT: Yeah.
TH: More the deeper truth.
PT: Yeah. And sometimes I’m like—eh, and then I feel lighter, you know, later [heralds State 2
transformation], If that makes sense. It takes a while to sink in. Oops (writing check), I wrote
Cando. [Perhaps this is an unconscious slip—can do!]
The Following Session 2 Weeks Later
Soraya comes in the following week with new reflections after digesting her experience.
PT: Uh, let’s see. So I thought a lot about the exercise that we did last time, and I found it very
comforting and I thought about it a lot (with a musical tone in her voice). [Sometimes patients
surprise themselves, and us, by what they do with the material of psychotherapy
between sessions.]
TH: Tell me what you thought about, what you found comforting.
PT: I just kept having this image of me and all those people kind of holding me up and kind of, leaving
that house, that childhood house and that bedroom (looking down, smiling). Yeah. And I think it’s
been really helpful (looks up at me). [In the time between sessions she has held on to the
image, and metabolized the experience.]
The proof is in the pudding. Despite all of the angry resistance, Soraya actually took in enough of our
work together to allow herself to move toward her younger self. When she was on her own, she was
effective in having a corrective self experience as she truly continued to make use of her image of
leaving her childhood home. I believe that what she received from our session was related to not being
alone with her fear of not being enough and receiving enough nourishment from me to counter her
fears. These were crucial ingredients for her to take home with her and internalize, to cook up what was
new into a corrective experience she could make sense of for herself.
TH: Great. Yeah. I’m interested in being with that comforting (draws hands together and stretching them
out) and that helpful and unpacking that [metaprocessing the specific benefits she named],
getting to know what’s happening.
PT: I wonder if I can describe that. Like I think so much stuff has been stemming from just a core
feeling of I’m not . . . And that image and that rallying of people behind me and rooting for me. Um,
it’s just making that shift a little bit. [Making use of inner resources to shift her felt sense of
not being enough.]
TH: You have your hand here (mirroring her hand on her heart), and I wonder if you could just take
another minute with that sense of your hand (tapping my chest). [Exploring her somatic signals.]
PT: Mm-hmm (brings her hand to her heart). It’s, it’s also part of the comforting thing of this is okay.
“I’m okay.” There were a lot of really bad circumstances. You know. [Differentiating who she is

from the circumstances of her past.]
This is huge for Soraya to acknowledge—that she is “okay.” She named that the circumstances were
bad, in acknowledgment that she is not what happened to her, another self-corrective experience to
dispel psychic equivalence.
TH: (slow and drawn out) Yeah.
PT: A lot of bad and unfortunate, you know, wasteful, in that I had just spent so much energy on them
instead of being me, instead of just, you know, relishing me [core state reflection] and, um . . .
[The true sense arises with self-compassion and undoing of psychic equivalence.]
TH: Yes.
PT: And participating in the world.
TH: Yes.
PT: Yeah, I don’t know if I am like, like, ready. And when I went to my high school reunion, it was like,
there was this whole other me, like maybe the real me [true self], you know? It was this whole
other me [declarative]. But it was so the opposite of how I felt internally. Like in high school, I was
worried I wasn’t pretty. I felt fat. I didn’t have a boyfriend when everyone had a boyfriend. But it
really wasn’t like many people talk about their, like traumatic teen years vis-à-vis their peers. [Core
state comparing past and present, weaving her autobiographical narrative.]
TH: Yeah.
PT: But for me so minute—compared to the kind of misery I felt . . . so repressed by my mother—I had
to spend so much time processing the insanity of existing in her reality. Yeah . . . like I was a prisoner.
TH: Right. I totally get what you’re saying. And, and the way that you’re speaking about it, feels like
there’s a sorting out of you and her that’s happening. [Affirming and harnessing that she is
actively differentiating from her mother.]
PT: Yeah. Yeah, that’s a good way. I feel really removed. Yeah. From her. But not so much in a denial
way but just in a like, I am not her. [Declarative truth]
TH: Yes, what a declaration. [Differentiation]
PT: Yeah.
TH: I mean that you get to know that in a very deep way right now. [Affirmation of core self]
Summary. In this vignette illustration we are working directly with the conflicts that drive
ambivalent/resistant patterning. When the patient is faced with the potential of abandoning her younger
self, she has an opportunity to investigate the ways she internalized how she was treated and how she
wants to be with herself. When she began to get the attention and care she needed—she resisted and
moved against the process. Her adult self felt unworthy of being enough for her younger self and also
feared that there would never be enough of what she needed, right out of Ainsworth’s (1978/2015)
notebook about the ambivalent pattern. Yet, as we, therapist and patient, held and explored her fears,
they released a bit at a time. When the patient takes her portrayal work home and sees her younger
self being supported to leave the house and bedroom of her childhood behind, she feels comforted. The
patient is able to have a corrective self experience, differentiating how she felt as a kid from who she is
now, and free from “the insanity of living inside her mother’s reality.” Free from being overly immersed
in her mother’s state of mind, she now knows she is not her. Her internal working model is rewiring to a
more effective internal representation of Self and a more realistic internal representation of her mother,
as the Other, not the ideal mother she would want but no longer the one who holds her back from living
life on her own terms.2
Healing Ambivalent/Resistant Attachment
In this chapter, a major theme of the vignettes has been patients differentiating from their caregiver’s
state of mind and turning their attention to self-discovery and self-action tendencies. In contrast to
helping someone with avoidant strategies to develop relational-action tendencies—the capacity to

connect to self and to others, and be able to receive and give care—someone with ambivalent strategies
needs corrective self experiences, and the release of self-action tendencies. Cultivating a sense of self
and the capacity to care for self is crucial. Connecting to the inner child who felt abandoned is key.
Ambivalence to fully receiving comfort due to the fear it will leave or not be enough needs to be
processed in the relationship between therapist and patient. By helping patients to both internalize their
therapist’s care and reliability and build a relationship with their younger aspects of self, the push–pull
dynamic to love and be loved can ease with the presence of self-to-self connection (Lamagna, 2011;
Lamagna & Gleiser, 2007).
Here are some of the main intervention pathways we showed in this chapter:
• Take an active therapist stance: help patients to slow down
• Offer explicit help; contain tangential speech
• Help client make use of your presence and care
• Develop patient’s capacity to internalize soothing and self-compassion
• Distinguish between thoughts and feelings, emotionality, and adaptive core emotion
• Connect core emotions with present experience
• Check for and build receptive affective capacity
• Cultivate connection to self experience
• Affirm emergent signs of self-agency, internal guidance, and wisdom
• Identify and tend to younger parts that were abandoned by the patient, as well as caregivers
• Support and affirm differentiation between self and other, between past and present
• Amplify glimmers of transformance: containment, self-soothing, self-knowing, and internal
guidance