11
The History of the Disorganization
Category (Grid 2)
Isn’t it ironic . . . we ignore those who adore us, adore those who ignore us,
hurt those who love us, and love those who hurt us.
—ATTRIBUTED TO ELLEN HOPKINS
Disorganization: The Collapse of Strategy & the
Strategy of Collapse
In contrast to being an organized pattern of attachment (as is true
of both the secure and the insecure patterns—avoidant,
ambivalent/resistant—we have discussed so far), disorganization is
not a pattern of attachment per se but rather a disordered quality of
experience that occurs when a person is lacking a coping strategy
for dealing with attachment-related trauma that overwhelms.
Disorganization is related to unresolved trauma in caregivers.
When caregivers have states of mind that are unresolved due to
their own trauma, which can be historical or ongoing due to current
conditions in their lives, they are usually frightened and/or
frightening in response to their children’s attachment needs. These
caregivers often have difficulties being with themselves and with
regulating their own affective experiences; this challenges their
capacity to tend to the needs of their babies. Consequently, their
infants and children cannot rely on them to be consistently available,
much less sensitive and responsive.
Being unresolved for their own trauma interferes with how these
caregivers interact with their infants. Often their behavior is
disturbing and dysregulated. They are often out of sync, misreading

the infant’s signals. Their actions are loaded with mismatches and
incongruent behaviors, confusion being present for both the infant
and caregiver. As a result, the child has difficulty trusting their
caregiver, and then develops difficulties trusting others and
subsequently with knowing and trusting themselves. Thus,
disorganization reveals the breakdown of innate attachment
behavior: the breaking down of trust in the attachment figure to
provide protection and care, the breakdown of the caregiving
behavioral system to respond with care to the attachment needs of
the child, and the breaking down of self-trust in the child that they
will be able to evoke the help that is needed.
By the time a child reaches the age of 6, patterns develop in
response to the disorganization and confusion. Some of these
children develop role reversal and other strategies of control: these
are recognizable coping behaviors to deal with the disorganization in
their caregivers, and their own disorganized/disordered attachment.
We stand by the initial findings about disorganization as a collapse in
strategy, since it points to the challenges inherent in treating
disorganized attachment. At the same time, we recognize that by
adulthood, many of our patients who present with disorganization
first present with strategies of control, which affects many of their
patterns of behavior in relationship, and reveal the collapse of
strategy only when they are unable to rely on those controlling
strategies they have built. Or for some, feeling desperate, yet
helpless to obtain the help they need, can drive them to collapse in a
last-ditch effort to draw support. Thus, we identify not only the
collapse of strategy but also the strategy of collapse.
In the preceding chapters on the formation of avoidant and
ambivalent/resistant attachment, both insecure yet organized
patterns of attachment, we brought in Mary Ainsworth’s early
findings of the Strange Situation, the Baltimore home observations,
and the AAI to call attention to the origins of these patterns of
attachment. We have also described the secure attachment pattern
to show how psychotherapists can aim to set the conditions for
secure relating with our patients. Now, as we begin to discuss
working with patients who show signs of disorganization, looking at

how the category itself came to be identified can help us organize
ourselves in the complexities of disorganization. We begin with
observations that came from Ainsworth’s Strange Situation, and
continue with research that developed with Mary Main, Beatrice
Beebe, and Karlen Lyons-Ruth, and their many colleagues and
collaborators. The final section of this chapter looks at how patients
present in psychotherapy when disorganization/unresolved trauma is
in the picture.
Ainsworth’s Strange Situation Protocol
How children responded to the stress of separation and reunion with
their parent was observed during the Strange Situation procedure.
Originally Ainsworth and her colleagues (1978/2015) noted three
patterns of response in the children: these became the categories of
secure and insecure avoidant and insecure ambivalent/resistant
attachment. However, Ainsworth et al. discovered that not all
children could be fit into the three categories of secure and insecure
attachment originally identified by Ainsworth, patterns referred to as
the A, B, C categories of the Strange Situation Protocol (SSP).
The classification of “disorganized attachment” came from
researching infants who were considered unclassifiable with respect
to Ainsworth’s A, B, C classifications. Ainsworth’s student Silvia Bell
made the first judgment of an infant’s unclassifiable behavior in her
doctoral dissertation. This infant was then assigned to a “best-fitting”
category (Ainsworth et al., 1978/2015, p. 63; Ainsworth & Bell,
1970). Mary Main, who at the time was also one of Ainsworth’s
students, became fascinated with the kids who did not fit:
furthermore, she was unsatisfied with classifying these
fundamentally unclassifiable infants into a “forced” or “best-fitting”
category. These infants became the focus of Main’s dissertation
research.
To picture what forms the basis for organized secure, organized
insecure avoidant, organized insecure ambivalent/resistant, and
disorganized/disordered attachment, we review the relationship

between the four behavioral systems of attachment that Bowlby
(1969/1982) identified, and the part they play in child–caregiver
interactions.
The Four Behavioral Systems of Attachment
Bowlby’s (1969/1982) four behavioral systems of attachment are the
fear/wariness system, the attachment system, the caregiving
system, and the exploratory system. Bowlby identified that the
fear/wariness behavioral system in infants and children is aroused by
external conditions, such as being alone, separated from an
attachment figure, loud sounds, darkness, animals, strange objects
or persons, or anything learned to cause pain. Due to fear, children
express alarm in many forms of crying from whimpering to sudden
cries for help or screaming. Optimally, these cries bring the
attachment figure to the child. As a child becomes more mobile, they
can seek contact with their caregiver.
The fear/wariness behavioral system is closely linked to the
attachment behavioral system and both of them have the biological
function of protecting the child. The attachment behavioral system is
activated when the child is feeling distressed by (a) internal
conditions, such as fatigue, hunger, pain, cold, and ill health; (b)
conditions of the environment: if the attachment figure is absent or
departing, or if the attachment figure discourages or even rejects
proximity; or (c) rebuffs by other adults or children (Bowlby,
1969/1982).
Attachment behavior is biologically designed so that when the
child’s attachment system is aroused, their parent’s reciprocal
caregiving behavioral system is activated. When the child is alarmed
or distressed and cries out, their attachment behavioral system calls
the caregiver to the child. As children become mobile, the child
moves toward their attachment figure for protection and care, thus
drawing the attachment figure’s attention. Caregiving stems from the
parent’s innate wiring to protect or care for their children. Ideally,
the parent is capable to recognize what is distressing or potentially

dangerous to their child, and to then provide an appropriate
response. When the frightened child is met by a sensitive and
responsive caregiver, physical contact, such as touch, cuddling, and
holding, can quiet the child’s attachment-seeking behavior. In other
words, the child settles within the safe haven of their caregiver. In a
secure functioning dyad, a child builds trust in the signaling that
arises from their attachment behavioral system in tandem with the
responsiveness of their parent’s caregiving behavioral system. When
their distress has been met, and they know their caregiver is
available as a secure base, then fear subsides, and then their
exploratory system is free to arise, which naturally occurs in securely
attached pairs/dyads (Ainsworth et al., 1978/2015; Bowlby,
1969/1982).
The child’s fear/wariness system, the attachment behavioral
system, and their parent’s caregiving behavioral system were studied
in the Strange Situation research. Distinctions between secure and
insecure attachment led researchers to identify outliers to the first
three patterns identified by Ainsworth and colleagues (1978/2015).
The following section contrasts organized patterns of attachment
with disorganization.
Early Observations: How the Category of Disorganization Came to Be
During the separation and reunion phases of the Strange Situation
procedure, the relationship between each child’s fear/wariness
system and the attachment behavioral system was investigated. The
child classified as secure expressed sadness upon separation from
their caregiver and was soothed by their caregiver’s presence when
they returned, which exemplifies how a secure relationship
functions. Once the child feels connected to the parent and calmed
in themselves, they can return their attention to the environment
and are free to engage and enjoy their exploratory behavioral
system (Ainsworth et al., 1978/2015).
The infants classified as avoidant deactivate their attachment
behavior by moving away and/or looking away from the caregiver,

and instead, direct their attention to the environment. When their
caregiver returns, the children steer away from seeking comfort. The
children classified as ambivalent/resistant often hyperactivate their
attachment behavior by directing their attention solely to the
caregiver and alternate between inconsolable clinging and angry
protest; even when their caregiver returns, the children are unable
to settle or receive comfort.
As mentioned above, there were children whose behavior was
not readily assigned to the secure or one of the insecure categories.
Main became intent on deciphering the behavior of the infants
who were identified as unclassifiable, or as a last resort, assigned to
a “best-fitting” category. Identifying the difficult-to-classify infants
through the lens of conflict behavior led to what ultimately became
the category of disorganized/disordered attachment. To understand
how fear and threat-driven behavior underlie adult disorganization,
and to distinguish between the conflict that drives the
ambivalent/resistant pattern of attachment, we review the findings
of the significant research that began with Bell and Main, and has
continued with Beebe, Lyons-Ruth, and their colleagues.
Additionally, these early observations shed light on the varieties
of experience that led Fosha (2000b) to describe disorganizing
behavior as “not feeling and not dealing” (p. 44). “Not feeling” is
shorthand meant to capture the difficulties a person may have
perceiving, receiving, and expressing affective experiences because
of numbness, dissociation, dysregulation, pathogenic affects, shame
spirals, and fragmentation. “Not feeling” also includes incomplete
affective experiences. The completion of core affective experiences
leads to the release of adaptive action tendencies (Frijda, 1986) that
are salient to healing unresolved trauma at the heart of
disorganization.
During her doctoral studies, Main had been drawn to ethologist
Robert Hinde’s (1966) book Animal Behavior and his observations of
animals in conflict situations. Hinde described “conflict behaviors”
(pp. 396–421), which he determined were arising from the
simultaneous activation of incompatible systems. Main (1973)
related this to the appearance of conflict behavior in infants and

studied Ainsworth’s narrative records for evidence of infant conflict
behavior with respect to their parents in the home. As part of her
dissertation research, Main recorded conflict behavior in 21-month-
old infants/toddlers and found about 10% of the infants difficult to
classify according to the A, B, C categories of the Strange Situation.
In the home observations of these five children, there were unusual
levels of difficulty in the mother–infant interactions. Notably, at least
three of the five mothers had behaved most peculiarly with their
offspring. One of the most frightening examples Main reports was
seeing one mother responding to her child with frightening animal-
like behaviors (e.g., including the mother’s bared teeth, and her
growling, hissing, and snarling, all of which convey extreme threat).
Later, Main and her colleague Donna Weston (1981) reviewed
low-risk Berkeley Strange Situations and found that 13% of the
infants exhibited conflict behaviors in a stressful situation,
discovering them to be unclassifiable: “Conflict behaviors have a
disordered, purposeless or odd appearance and seem to lack an
immediate explanation” (p. 935). Subsequently, Main and Judith
Solomon (1990) reviewed 200 of their Bay Area, California,
unclassified infants to search for specific themes in the diverse
expressions of conflict behaviors. They noted how some of the
children approached their parent by moving backward or they moved
toward the parent and stopped midway as if in a freeze-frame. They
identified displays of “conflicted, odd, or inexplicable” behaviors in
some of the children.
Main and Solomon’s (1990) significant finding was that those
infants whose behavior in the Strange Situation was not classifiable
in the A, B, or C systems, did not appear to resemble one another in
any coherent, organized way. Instead, Main and Solomon recognized
that what these infants shared in common were “bouts or sequences
of behavior which seemed to lack a readily observable goal,
intention, or explanation” (p. 122). They selected the following
clusters of behaviors as indices of disorganization:
1. Sequential displays of contradictory behavior

2. Simultaneous displays of contradictory behavior
3. Undirected, misdirected, incomplete, or interrupted
movements
4. Stereotypes, asymmetrical or mistimed movements, or
anomalous postures
5. Freezing, stilling, slow movements or expression
6. Display of apprehension regarding the caregiver
7. Overt signs of disorientation, including confusion (pp. 134–
140)
Main (1973, 1979) developed a scale for assessing
“disorganized/disordered” behavior (Lyons-Ruth & Jacobvitz, 2008).
The majority of infants showing conflict behaviors fit a description of
“disorganized/disoriented,” which led Main and Solomon (1986,
1990) to devise the fourth classification, D, to add to Ainsworth’s
categories. Indicators of disorganization include sequential or
simultaneous displays of contradictory behavior patterns; undirected,
incomplete, or interrupted movements or expressions; freezing,
stilled, slow movements or expressions; apprehension regarding the
parent; and aspects of disorganization or disorientation, including
confusion (1990, pp. 134–140).
When There Is Fear: The Collapse of an Organized Strategy
Years later, Main and Hesse (1990, 1999) identified that dissociated
fear was a hallmark of disorganized attachment, and that the haven
of safety was a source of alarm. When children were frightened by
their parents, this presented a dilemma they called “fright without
solution” (1999, p. 484). They described this paradox as one in
which “impulses to approach the parent as the infant’s haven of
safety will inevitably conflict with impulses to flee from the parent as
a source of alarm” (Hesse & Main, 1999, p. 484). The children could
neither approach their parent for comfort nor avoid their parent and
turn their attention to the environment to cope. Instead, their
behaviors showed an array of odd postures or movements; sudden

inappropriate affect; and mixed signals of approach and avoid, such
as moving backward toward their parent or freezing midway to the
parent with arms up in the air or becoming still with a trance-like
expression.
Fosha (personal communication, February 12, 2024), in
conversation with Pando-Mars about the very phenomenon
described by Hesse and Main’s (1999) powerful phrase of “fright
without solution,” came up with the phrase “attachment without
solution.” In their dialogue, Fosha realized that “attachment without
solution” is the paradox counterpart to “fright without solution”: the
attachment impulse to reach for the protection of the attachment
figure so as to feel safe when the fear/wariness system gets
activated cannot be exercised when the parent themselves is the
source of the fear. The fright doesn’t have a solution but neither
does the attachment: the adaptive action of the fright is to escape
from danger and the adaptive action tendency of the attachment
system is to seek safety through reaching for the protection of the
attachment figure. When the parent is the source of the fear, neither
adaptive action tendency can be put into action: There is no
solution. The result is the paralysis and freeze that Main and
Solomon (1990) described in the behavior of the children for whom
the D category, disorganized/disoriented, was created.
In the Strange Situation, the avoidant children used an organized
strategy of deactivating their attachment system, stemming from
their expectancies of rejection from their attachment figure.
Relatedly, the ambivalent/resistant attachment children also
displayed an organized strategy, hyperactivating their attachment
system via inconsolable crying and angry protest to get the attention
of their often inconsistently responsive attachment figure. Main and
Hesse (1990) described what characterized the behavior for the
disorganized children in the reunion phase of the Strange Situation:
When their attachment figure appears, they were confronted by
their expectancies of the often unpredictable frightening or
frightened—and thus confusing—behavior of their parent. Their
fright and confusion, or disorientation, stops them in their tracks,

where they feel neither safe to approach nor safe to flee. And
exploration does not even enter the picture.
Main and Hesse (1990) found “In contrast to both avoidant and
ambivalent infants—who may be frightened by difficulties in
obtaining caregiver responsiveness in stressful situations—the fear
the D infant experiences stems from the parent as its source” (p.
180). Seeking comfort from the one who is frightening or frightened
themselves or whose caregiving behavior is disordered, disrupts the
child’s approach and the child is subjected to the apprehension that
Hesse and Main (1999) named “fright without solution” (p. 484).
In disorganization, collapse happens between the fear/wariness
system and the attachment behavioral system. When the infant
begins to engage their attachment system, fear of the parent arises
and they become incapable to reach out to them for comfort nor use
an organized strategy to protect themselves from fear (Main &
Hesse, 1990). In other words, the child either detaches from their
feelings of fear or they detach from their urge to seek protection in
the caregiver, which is what Fosha (2000b) refers to as “not feeling
and not dealing” (p. 44). In psychotherapy sessions, when we begin
to engage relationally with some patients, our invitation to connect
instigates the arousal of their attachment system, which can be
especially alarming for those with disorganized attachment.
Daniel Siegel’s (2007) conceptualization of the disorganized
pattern is when longing and fear co-arise, no response is possible
given that two neurological circuits cannot fire at the same time.
When the ones who are supposed to protect and care for you are
frightening or frightened themselves, to need and approach them is
incompatible with fearing and wanting to get away from them.
Consequently, it’s as if one of the circuit breakers kicks off. Fright
without solution occurs as the innate biological pairing between the
neurological circuits of the fear/wariness behavioral system and the
attachment behavioral system breaks down.
Disorganization can coincide with other patterns of attachment
when attachment-related fear surfaces. “Disorganized and
disoriented” behaviors reflect the person’s absence of a coherent
and adaptive coping strategy, which was correlated with the

unresolved state of mind of the caregiver (Main et al., 1985).
Disorganization occurs as the collapse of “behavioral or attentional
strategies” (Hesse & Main, 1999) that happens when early
attachment needs are wired with trauma. In adult patients, collapse
might show up as sinking into pathogenic affects, dropping into
states of unbearable aloneness, and having difficulty making use of
the therapist’s presence and care. The helplessness of “fright
without solution” manifests in these dark places where trust in
showing the need for comfort is shut down by anticipated fear of the
attachment figure.
When the attachment figure is threatening, a child is faced with
an irreconcilable dilemma. Unsafe to feel or express their fear, for
lack of a suitable caregiving response, they anticipate overwhelm.
Often, they dissociate, disconnecting longing from the attachment
behavioral system and/or disconnecting from fear and overwhelm
arising from the fear/wariness system (i.e., thus not feeling). In this
way, dissociation dismantles the charge. Porges (2017) identified
that the dorsal vagal branch of the parasympathetic nervous system
promotes immobilization when the organism is facing life threat.
Immobilization appears behaviorally as shutdown or collapse, which
is associated with dissociation. Some children whose fear/wariness
system is disengaged may become overly friendly or spaced out.
Others whose attachment behavioral system is disrupted may
become intimidated, intimidating, or hostile. Thus, disorganization
manifests in disordered, interrupted, or disoriented behaviors. The
above examples of psychotherapy patients shows how the patient’s
collapsing and shutdown interferes with their capacity to access
relational accompaniment.
In adulthood, disorganization can be conceptualized as resulting
from the fear associated with memories of traumatic events that
remain unresolved. When such emotions are activated in current-day
relationships, this can generate enormous amounts of anxiety and
distress in anticipation of “fright without solution” (Hesse & Main,
1999).
We continue to discuss how disorganization manifests in
psychotherapy patients later in this chapter in the section “The Initial

Presentation.” Next, we apply these conceptualizations to a particular
psychotherapy patient.
A Clinical Example From a Psychotherapy Patient
Bowlby (1973) conceptualized how our attachment experiences are
internalized and become internal working models of self and other,
which he determined helps an individual build understanding of their
place in their world, to predict the future and make suitable plans.
One of the key features concerns the self’s perception of the other,
with respect to their role as caregiver. He poses the question, “How
accessible and responsive [are] his attachment figures likely to be
should he turn to them for support?” (p. 203). Here, the interplay of
the fear/wariness system, the attachment behavioral system, and
the caregiving behavioral system are interwoven. The following
clinical vignette provides an example of how my patient Abigail’s
attachment behavior was thwarted, despite her courageous
mobilization toward her mother for comfort. Abigail shared this
memory when we were beginning her therapy and exploring her
“sleepy defense” around closeness and contact with her husband
and children. The “sleepy defense” is a way to describe the kicking
in of a dorsal vagal response from Polyvagal Theory (Porges, 2004,
2009; see Chapter 2 for discussion).
Abigail told me her first childhood memory. She was barely a toddler.
She was woken in the night by a huge thunderstorm. Having heard
the expression “it’s raining cats and dogs,” she literally imagined that
dead cats and dogs were falling on the roof, and she was terrified.
When sharing this memory, Abigail repeated the word “terrified”
seven times. She had gotten herself out of her crib and padded
down the hall, toward her parents’ bedroom, guided by her left hand
on the wall. Her memory stopped there. Later in life she asked her
mother what happened and if she remembered seeing her that night
in the hallway. Her mother said yes. “What did you do?” Abigail
asked. “I put you back in your crib,” her mother replied.

I was immediately struck by Abigail’s agency (Bowlby’s goal-directed
behavior) to get herself out of her crib in the middle of the night.
The sound of cracking thunder, the dark, and her imagining dead
cats and dogs landing on the roof activated her fear/wariness
system. Bravely, she found her way down the dark hallway,
instinctively driven by her attachment behavioral system to seek out
the protection and care of her mother. Her mother’s act of putting
Abigail back in bed left her alone with her fear. I believe her memory
stopped there because she had to dissociate from the terror that
was unseen and untended, generating a significant link between
activation of her nervous system and being put back to bed. Needing
help and contact with others became a trigger for dissociation. That
night, going back to sleep—in the wake of fear—became Abigail’s
“sleepy defense” for coping with fear.
Now, it is important to note that as a singular or infrequent
incident, the above experience may not be noteworthy. As Tronick’s
(1989, 1998, 2009) research has shown, our attachment
relationships do not need to be perfectly attuned 100% of the time.
In fact the rule of thumb is one third/one third/one third for
attunement, disruption, and repair, respectively. However, when such
drives to reach out for help and care are repeatedly thwarted in the
course of a person’s development, as was the case for Abigail,
insecure attachment and disorganization can often follow. For
Abigail, her mother was prone to episodes of psychosis, which
inevitably contributed to her diminished capacity to provide attuned
and adequate care for her daughter at many significant
developmental periods. Consequently, Abigail’s internal working
model related to receiving help and giving help, in particular being
available for her young kids, was characterized by her sleepy
defense. What Abigail could not articulate at the time, but shared
with me years later, was that when her children were young, she
was triggered by their attachment needs, and often dissociated to
cope. Case vignettes from different portions of her treatment are
introduced in Chapter 12, “Working to Transform Patterns of
Disorganized Attachment.”

Further Research and Observations of Mother–Infant Face-to-Face
Interactions
Researchers continued to explore the origins of patterns of
attachment and disorganization by studying interactions between
infants and their caregivers, who for the most part continued to be
mothers. Beebe and her collaborators investigated face-to-face
communication between mothers and infants, with infants who were
4 months old. Their research corroborated the results of the Strange
Situation procedure (Beebe & Lachman, 2014). Through a second-
by-second microanalysis of videotaped mother–infant interactions, at
a level imperceptible to real-time observation, researchers were able
to examine the intricate dance of attunement, disruption, and repair
(see Chapter 2, pp. 61–67). Beebe et al.’s (2016) picture book
depicts still frames of the videotape analysis as realistic drawings
that provide vivid illustrations of what happens when mothers are
sensitively mirroring their infants and are affectively attuned to
them, and what happens when they are not. Here, we are
specifically identifying what occurs in dyads where the infant at 1
year is classified as disorganized, in contrast to secure dyads.
The following description of a secure mother–infant dyad
provides examples of behaviors that engender secure attachment.
After which, descriptions of what occurs in disorganizing mother–
infant dyads provide examples of behaviors that unfortunately are
predictors of disorganization. Then we provide another
compare/contrast with an example of what occurs in the face-to-face
mirroring studies with future avoidant babies.
A secure dyad. In the first picture frame, the infant is smiling and
the mother is smiling back, with a big smile; this is referred to as a
highly positive exchange. In the next frame, the infant pulls his arms
and head back, and the mom leans in with a sober look on her face.
Then the baby looks away, with a very negative look on his face. The
mom has moved back: a sensitive gesture that attunes to her baby’s
signal. The following frame shows the baby reorienting toward the

mother. He pulls his lips down, and the mother is pulling her lips
down, which matches the baby’s lower lip. Even though the baby’s
eyes are closed, the mother and baby appear to be in sync. The
mom’s attunement to her baby’s distress and pulling back shows the
coordination of their dance. In the next frame, the baby opens his
eyes, and even though he does not appear to be seeing his mom’s
face, he reaches. The mom reaches toward him, still with a sober
look on her face. Then the baby looks at his mother and opens his
mouth. In frame six, their fingers touch, and they are in connection.
These pictures depict what happens in a split second, underneath
conscious awareness. The baby looks away, and then returns, which
demonstrates Tronick’s (1998) findings that babies are capable of
self-regulation, which is part of the dance of attunement, disruption,
and repair constantly unfolding between infants and their caregivers.
When the mother sensitively joins the distress of the infant, matches
their infant’s expression, and reflects understanding, the infant can
return to balance and reengage with his mother. Beebe (2014)
states that these moments of joining are crucial and an example of
what is sadly missing in the dyads where their patterns of interaction
are predictors of disorganization.
A disorganizing dyad. The depictions of a disorganizing dyad show
the mismatch between the baby’s expression and the mother’s
expression. In one frame, when the baby shows distress, the mother
shows a look of surprise. In another, the baby shows distress and
the mother smiles, as if trying to give the baby what she thinks will
help. In another, the baby shows distress and she looks away. While
she responds, her response is not in sync. Next, when the baby pulls
away, the mother looms, and is too close (Beebe et al., 2016).
With compassion, Beebe is clear in saying that most of the
mothers in the disorganizing dyads are unresolved for their own
trauma and have a history of abuse. Usually these mothers are
frightened. She conjectures that the infant’s distress actually triggers
the mom’s unresolved trauma, and she becomes unable to match
her infant. She is lacking the affective competence to be with her

own experience and feel her infant’s experience at the same time.
Her behavior displays contradictory behaviors with her infant. Beebe
describes that it’s not that the mother isn’t sensitive to her baby but
rather her sensitivity picks up the baby’s distress, which then
triggers her (Beebe et al., 2016). For instance, the infant might be
frantically distressed and the mother’s face shows surprise or a
smile. This mismatch adds to the distress and confusion of the baby,
when their mother is unable to meet or find a way to shift what is
disturbing to them. She may make threatening expressions or she
may look at her baby with a blank look of emotional disconnection,
further disorienting for the baby. When her baby becomes frantic,
the mother’s feeling of being incapable intensifies, which is
disconcerting for the mother and may even impact how she feels
toward her baby for “making her feel” so helpless. These
disorganizing dyads are laden with examples of disturbing action
sequences in which the lack of joining leaves both members of the
dyad feeling alone, defeated, and confused. Beebe reports that
these interactions can be painful to witness.
An avoidant dyad. In contrast, in the studies with mothers and
babies who become avoidant, their sequences of interactions show
out-of-sync behavior. The baby looks at the mother and she looks
away. Or the mother looms in and comes too close and the baby
leans back. At times her touch is intrusive and the baby pulls away.
While these mismatches are disconcerting for the baby, there is a
sense that the mother is there or not there in a way the baby may
not like and then uses an avoiding strategy.
The difference in the disorganizing dyad lies in the quality of the
mother’s absence and/or her conflicted behavior (i.e., looking right
at the baby with vacant eyes, which scares and adds to the baby’s
distress, leading to “fright without solution”).
Another way to look these phenomena is through the lens of the
mother’s caregiving. As part of her assessment in her Baltimore
study, Ainsworth (1978/2015) developed the Maternal Caregiving
and Interaction Scales. She observed and identified specific qualities

of caregiving that contribute to the effectiveness of caregiving
behavior to bring about secure attachment (as discussed in Chapter
1). The first scale, caregiver Sensitivity vs. Insensitivity (Chapter 1,
p. 18), is presented here to consider how Ainsworth et al.’s
(1978/2015) definition of sensitivity articulates what is at play with
disorganization when the caregiver’s unresolved trauma interferes.
Caregiver sensitivity vs. insensitivity. Beebe’s (2016) observations
directly correlate to the subcategories of Ainsworth’s first scale:
Sensitivity vs. Insensitivity. The first condition of sensitivity is that (a)
the mother needs to be aware of the signal, (b) then she must make
an accurate interpretation of the signal, (c) respond appropriately to
the signal, and (d) respond promptly (Ainsworth et al., 1978/2015).
Beebe named that the unresolved mother is sensitive—however, she
becomes activated by her baby’s distress. Through the lens of
Ainsworth’s sensitivity scales, while the mother may be aware of the
baby, she is not able to interpret her baby’s signals accurately.
Ainsworth determined that in addition to awareness of the signal
there are two more components needed to be able to accurately
interpret the signal. In addition to the mother’s awareness, she must
be free from distortion and capable of empathy (Ainsworth et al.,
1978/2015). When the mother is unresolved from her own trauma
and is triggered by her baby’s attachment needs, she is not free
from distortion and thereby is unable to provide empathy. Thus, she
is unable to provide an appropriate response. Or do so promptly.
Both Beebe and Ainsworth identify that when the baby’s signals are
not met with a meaningful response, the baby can lose confidence in
the efficacy of their signaling to draw out what they need from the
caregiver.
In psychotherapy sessions, some patients are more sensitive to
moments of mismatch and misattunement than others. Through the
examples of what happens in secure dyads, psychotherapists can
identify markers of communication (i.e., attuning to the patient’s
shifts in gaze, perhaps noticing when they might be markers of self-
regulation), which when responded to accurately can help build

safety and help restore the patient’s trust that coordination and
repair can follow disconnection with reconnection. By meeting our
patient’s signals with sensitivity and responsiveness, we can help
patients to experience their own emotional and relational signals as
meaningful. In this way, psychotherapists have an organizing
function: The aim of building a secure base is to help patients have
an experience of being met, and if we miss, we aim for an
opportunity to repair through attending to what the patient needs
for reconnection and recoordination.
As we continue with research into the interactions with mothers
and infants, Lyons-Ruth and her collaborators offer insight into
disrupted communications that impact the development of secure
and insecure patterns of attachment and disorganization.
When Communication Is Disrupted: Attachment and Intersubjectivity
Lyons-Ruth and associates (1999, 2006) researched the
intersubjective dialogue between parents and children. Interested in
what contributes to security of attachment, they emphasize the
importance of collaborative communication, “strategies of sharing
that are truthful and sensitive to the states of mind of both parties
with adjustment in early development for the imbalance in
developmental capacities of the two partners” (p. 604). Caregivers’
capacity to understand and provide comfort when their child’s fear is
aroused is an important way caregivers help to build attachment
security, helping their child not only in the moment but over time as
well, to build trust in their intersubjective field. In contrast, they note
that
less collaborative strategies of sharing within the family . . .
are more restricted or one-sided in that they privilege one
person’s voice over the other’s (e.g., the parent’s emotional
needs, as in ambivalent strategies) or certain forms of truth
over other forms of truth (e.g., happy affects over sad or
angry affects, as in avoidant strategies). (p. 604)

The influence of this one-sided strategy of communication is evident
in patients who have trouble expressing their feeling or their needs,
convinced there is no room to be heard. They believe that their voice
is not important or they fear if they dare to speak of their own
specific need, they will hear back a message from their parent akin
to “it’s my way or the highway . . .”
Expanding Main and Hesse’s frame that the parent as a source of
alarm leads to infant disorganization, Lyons-Ruth and her associates
(2006) found that the absence of regulating caregiver responses will
also lead to infant disorganization. They state, “The more general
caregiving mechanism related to disorganization may be the lack of
effective caregiver regulation of fearful arousal, rather than explicit
fear of the caregiver herself” (p. 605). Just as we identified in Beebe
et al.’s (2016) face-to-face studies, crucial to building security is the
capacity of the caregiver to be with and help the baby to regulate
both positive and negative affects.
When the caregiver is unpredictably helpless and frightened
themselves, their children sometimes take the role of caregiver for
their wounded parent. Facing a parent who has dissociated, who is
staring off into space or crumbling to pieces, these parentified (and
sometimes petrified) children summon a quality of caring-yet-
dominating presence to help their parent regain some semblance of
order. By the age of 6, some children develop controlling role-
reversal strategies, taking control of the parent-child interaction
(Main & Cassidy, 1988; Cassidy 1990), being either controlling-
punitive or controlling-caregiving (Main et al., 2005). This too is
protective, and such strategies enact “I can’t need you and be
scared of you at the same time, so I will punish you or control you
through taking care of you in the meantime.” And while we’ve been
identifying how disorganization is the collapse of strategy, it is also
true that some of these controlling and caregiving behaviors that
these children adopt through role reversal continue into adulthood.
In the way that the self-reliance of the avoidant pattern can be
seen as pseudo self-reliance, and the preoccupation with the
ambivalent strategy can be seen as pseudo relational, what if we see
the disorganized child who adopts role reversal as becoming a

pseudo attachment figure to their parent? Their caregiving and
controlling behaviors are more about managing the parent as a way
to cope with their own otherwise unmanageable feelings evoked by
the parent’s frightened and disordered behavior. There is a quality of
taking over rather than being with, of doing for rather than being
helped, which characterizes the parentified nature of the
disorganized child’s behavior. As adults, they may become caregivers
or become bossy and angry, both of which are controlling strategies
to deal with the underlying disorganization. The problem lies in the
tendency to treat relationships in a unilateral rather than mutual
fashion, lacking in authentic relatedness, relating to others without
the collaboration Lyons-Ruth talks about, and without the sense of
mutual understanding that Bowlby referred to as a “goal-corrected
partnership.”
Lyons-Ruth (2006) describes that the key loss is that of the
child’s own subjectivity and initiative, as their own needs have been
subjugated in service to their parent in absentia. Her studies
describe how parental communications are disrupted, and how
specific disruptions, in turn, have specific impacts on the children.
Lyons-Ruth found “five broad aspects of disrupted communications
are
a. Parental withdrawing responses
b. Negative–intrusive responses
c. Role-confused responses
d. Disoriented responses
e. A set of responses we termed affective communication errors,
which include both the mother’s giving simultaneous
conflicting cues to the infant and her failures to respond to
clear affective signals from the infant
The studies of these disrupted communication patterns show profiles
of mother and infant interactions that fit in the disorganized
spectrum” (p. 606).

The “disordered” aspect of the disorganized category refers to
the caregiver’s noncontingent responsiveness to their child, behavior
that is not matching and even more so is disruptive. The absence of
response or sense of being there but not really being there is
disturbing to the child, which is what Lyons-Ruth refers to as
parental withdrawing responses or disoriented responses. There is
no there there for the child to lean into or push up against to
establish a sense of self. As well as impacting the child to take on
roles of controlling-caregiving, the controlling-punitive aspect of this
pattern can also develop into threatening behaviors, acting out
impulsively in threatening actions toward the self or others.
The classification of “disorganized/disordered” is a very important
contribution that sheds light on some of the complex behavioral
dynamics that can occur through unresolved trauma. Studies by
Egeland and Sroufe (1981) have found that greater percentages of
disorganization appear in high-risk populations, those with
impoverished circumstances, single parenting, and intergenerational
trauma.
We now turn our attention to addressing how disorganization
manifests in clinical settings with an adult population.
How Disorganization Manifests in Clinical Settings
With an Adult Population: The Initial Presentation
Given how at times disorganization presents together with other
patterns of insecure attachment or even secure attachment, this
section of initial presentation is designed to identify the salient
features of disorganization when they appear. Patients who initially
show patterns of secure attachment or insecure avoidant or insecure
ambivalent/resistant attachment can become disorganized when fear
related to unresolved trauma is activated. So far in this chapter we
have identified how disorganization is the collapse of strategy, and
also how disorganization may reside underneath strategies of
control. In adults, sometimes dissociation can be a defensive
strategy related to disorganized attachment. We explore these

distinct presentations in this section and in more depth in Chapter
12.
One of the most challenging aspects of human relationships is
when there is a mix of conflicting needs and feelings toward loved
ones. In secure attachment, conflicts can be recognized and
navigated with an autonomous state of mind, which has the capacity
for differentiation and connection. In insecure attachment, conflicts
can be unmanageable and bring about patterns of avoidance,
ambivalence, and resistance as discussed in the preceding chapters.
In disorganization, conflicts arise in the context of unresolved
trauma; conflicted behaviors stem from fear of the parent and the
impossible dilemma of “fright without solution.” Also, when growing
up with a traumatized parent who is frightened and unresolved with
respect to trauma, conflicts can arise between caregiving the parent
and the person’s developing their own sense of self and capacity to
act on their own behalf. Here, we add the dilemma of “attachment
without solution.” The self has not developed a reliable protective
strategy nor can they rely on the frightening or frightened
attachment figure for a safe haven. Fosha (this volume) recognized
that “attachment without solution” is a complement to “fright
without solution,” as the person cannot rely on their attachment
figure, nor can they do without them as they cannot fully rely on
their own self.
Some patients show up to therapy with lives that appear chaotic;
perhaps their primary relationship is on the brink of dissolution, or
they are in relationship cycles of makeup and breakup. Relationships
with loved ones can be burdened by the intensity of control issues
that are bound tightly around unresolved trauma. Patients may be
struggling with life transitions, when the aftermath of growing up
with disorganized attachment left them with lapses and incomplete
development. Confusion arises in individuals when their unresolved
state of mind from the past intrudes upon the present moment,
creating destabilization and triggering upset in the here and now.
Present time can be difficult to distinguish from “trauma time” (van
der Hart et al., 2010).

The way disorganization manifests clinically can vary immensely.
The patient’s presentation might become disoriented, confused, or
challenging in their presentation. The patient’s affect may not match
their verbal expression. Emotional experience related to certain
events is disconnected from explicit memories; implicit memory may
drive reactive behavior. When speaking, the patient may jump from
one story to the next, which can cascade into overwhelm and
flooding for the patient. Or they fear “falling apart.” Often their
younger parts of self hold emotional memories—however, they tend
to be fragmented, cordoned off, and/or neglected. Some patients
describe being in relationships where they are being mistreated or
they mistreat others. Some patients struggle with caregiving, and
control issues and have great difficulty trusting others, sharing
power, and developing collaborative strategies of relating.
In sessions, some patients describe episodes of out-of-control
behaviors and dysregulated emotion, and yet appear calm and
slightly bewildered as they try to relate what happened. They may
be numb, even disconnected about what triggered them to the point
of extreme behavior. Others may feel embarrassed yet confused.
Some patients present as secure or organized insecure, yet become
disoriented during the session when emotional material is triggered
and breaks through their organized defensive strategies. This can
surprise the clinician as the window of tolerance rapidly shrinks and
disrupts the interactive flow of psychotherapy, marking the need to
shift focus to affect regulation.
When working with patients who present with disorganized
attachment and are unresolved for attachment trauma and related
disorganization, fear and uncertainty may arise in relationship to self
and other. The combination of “fright without solution” and
“attachment without solution” can make for difficult influences when
we are working explicitly with the therapeutic relationship. For
instance, the patient may have no template for the perceived “older,
wiser other” who is capable of being sensitive and responsive at a
time of need, and subsequently they are befuddled with how to
receive our attention. Or as they begin to acknowledge feeling the
therapist’s care and understanding, an opposite feeling of pushing

away or dissociating may arise as longing and fear are experienced
as contradictory, and the hope of safety is so improbable. Some of
these challenges to our relational work are identified and addressed
in the following chapter.
The state of mind we see in our adult patients with disorganized
attachment is often unresolved, as was their caregiver’s state of
mind. Through studying individuals’ discourse during the AAI, Main
and Hesse (1990) identified that the caregiver’s unresolved (for
trauma)/disorganized state of mind correlates with disorganized
behavior in the infant. When these “unresolved” caregivers were
discussing topics of abuse or loss, there were lapses in speech or
reasoning in their discourse. Main and Hesse attributed these lapses
to the arousal of partially dissociated fear being activated and
subsequently the narrative comes out in incomplete expressions or
prolonged silence, and may not hold together in a coherent way. In
some speakers, there were disturbances in space and time—for
instance, speaking in the present tense about someone who has
died (Main, 2000). During psychotherapy sessions, when patients
are sharing significant memories or traumatic experiences, we might
find that their narrative becomes less clear and less comprehensible,
pointing to the emergence of unresolved fear and touching into
previously dissociated affects.
Since confusion can be such a strong element of disorganization,
finding ways to create structures and build meaning for the work of
psychotherapy are essential. Explicit relational work is needed to
provide new and corrective experiences in the present to counter
what was missing or overwhelming in the past. The need for
collaboration between therapist and patient is stronger than ever.
Psychotherapists may need to cultivate bravery and monitor our
affective competence, as we move toward helping patients in the
destabilizing territory of disorganization and unresolved trauma.
These themes are addressed in the following chapter, as we present
ways to conceptualize what is happening and specific ways to
intervene with clinical vignettes and discussion.