12
Working to Transform Patterns of Disorganized
Attachment (Grids 1 and 3)
This was the full throttle type love that I never got figured out properly, due to being raised in
shotgun fashion what my twisted little raggedy heart had always, always wanted. A mother. Simple
as that.
—BARBARA KINGSOLVER, DEMON COPPERHEAD
Disorganization: The Collapse of Strategy & the Strategy of
Collapse
In avoidant attachment, at a deep level, basic trust in the Other has broken, while the
person’s Self has maintained its integrity, albeit in a somewhat devitalized fashion. In
ambivalent/resistant attachment, while the person’s basic trust in the Other is severely
compromised, and the reliance on Self has been selectively unattended to,
nevertheless we see them, sometimes against all odds, holding on to relational hope
and expectancy for the Other to come through. When patients present with
disorganized attachment patterns and have been raised in attachment relationships
conditioned with fear, often both their trust in Other and their trust in Self has
fractured. Therefore, as psychotherapists engage the central AEDP therapist stance of
establishing safety and undoing aloneness with a patient who presents with
disorganized attachment, we may be challenged by the patient’s enacted helplessness,
which makes sense if they have been raised in an environment in which attachment
and fear were mixed, related to “fright without solution” and “attachment without
solution.”
Fosha (personal communication, February 12, 2024) came up with the phrase
“attachment without solution” through conversation with Pando-Mars about how to
conceptualize what we are seeing when by adulthood many of the “disorganized
infants” have formed patterns of behavior to cope with the disorganized/disordered
attachment of their caregivers and subsequently themselves. As well as “fright without
solution,” it became clear that “attachment without solution” was a significant factor.
While holding the tenet that disorganized attachment is the result of an infant’s
collapse of strategy, we also hold the empirically based knowledge (Main et al., 2005)
that by the time many of these infants and children become adults, they have
developed strategies and patterns of behavior, including the strategy of collapse, to
cope with their underlying disorganization. Here, psychotherapists may need to fortify
our affective competence as we seek to build the conditions for a secure base and
safe haven to help patients with disorganized attachment. Helping patients to make

use of our relational accompaniment when their early attachment experiences have
been so fraught with fear requires us to be both steady and brave in the process of
helping these patients to explore previously unoccupied pathways in relationship with
self and other.
To do so, in this chapter we continue to draw from the grids to help us organize
our way of conceptualizing and attending to each patient’s presentation. We look to
Grid 1, The Configurations of the Secure Attachment Pattern, for characteristics of
secure attachment (see Chapter 5) to inform how we can orient our way of being and
focus our intentions to aim for secure functioning and co-creating safety with each of
our patients. Additionally, when we are working with disorganization and unresolved
trauma, by identifying these patients’ markers of secure functioning, even if scarce
initially, we support their building trust in themselves and also help them locate
resources they can draw upon throughout our work. As transformance detectives, we
are on the lookout for those markers of secure functioning and make use of them
when we encounter them.
In Grid 2, The Configurations of Insecure Attachment Patterns: Avoidant,
Ambivalent/Resistant, and Disorganized (see Chapters 5 and 6), we see the
configurations of disorganized attachment next to the columns of avoidance and
ambivalence/resistance. Even when patients primarily show markers and signs of
avoidant or ambivalent/resistant attachment, there may be some who become
disorganized especially when stressed by the arousal of their attachment system, and
then unresolved attachment trauma surfaces. Confusion becomes pronounced, or
there is dissociation, staring off, clouding over, or the “light going out of their eyes.” Or
a pattern of caretaking and control as a coping strategy becomes more pronounced.
To see the configuration of disorganized patterns of attachment alongside their
corresponding interventions, we include Grid 6, The Configuration of the Disorganized
Attachment Pattern With Clinical Markers & Interventions, to accompany this chapter.
Grid 6 identifies markers of specific elements of the disorganized configuration,
such as response to attachment system arousal; nervous system activation and affect
regulation; characteristic defenses, anxiety, and characteristic fears, with specific
interventions; and desirable adaptive action and treatment goals tailored to address
disorganized attachment (see Table 12.1).
We can look to Grid 6 to identify the therapist common reactivities that may arise
when engaging in treatment with patients who present with disorganized attachment
and an unresolved/frightening or frightened state of mind. Again, we acknowledge
that despite psychotherapists’ interest and dedication, it can happen that
psychotherapists find ourselves in an unintended reaction with a patient we are deeply
committed to helping. Each of us is human; each of us has an attachment history of
our own; when we engage our nervous systems, right-brain to right-brain engagement
through relational and experiential methods, miscoordination and recoordination is
natural and inevitable. We can also see in Grid 6 the therapist metaskills we can draw
upon if and when these reactivities are activated. In this chapter’s section on the
therapist stance, we identify therapist common reactivities and ways we can intervene
when we find ourselves in a reactive mode (see Chapter 6, pp. 188–189). In order to
provide the necessary ingredients for building a trusting therapeutic relationship, as

well as to help work through one of our unintended reactions, we identify several
therapist metaskills (see Chapter 6, pp. 190–192) that can help us to reorient and re-
self-regulate.
In working with disorganization, when the patient has experienced an ongoing lack
of safety and confusing mismatches with their attachment figure, one of the results
can be difficulties in building coordinated relationships. Experiences of “attachment
without solution” (Fosha, this volume) and “fright without solution” (Hesse & Main,
1999) are not helpful precedents for engaging with a present-day person offering
relational connection and stirring attachment longings. Thus, it can be helpful for
psychotherapists to anticipate the potential for miscoordination in these moments. An
inadvertent disruption, or even a rupture, might occur when relational connection is
offered. Listening for and holding how each patient describes what triggers them
around relatedness may help us prepare for when we are in these moments. In
addition, learning which therapist common reactivities may arise with disorganization
and which therapist metaskills might serve as a ballast to assist us in this endeavor is
useful. When we find ourselves off balance, we want to be able to catch ourselves as
soon as possible to recoordinate with the patient, and when necessary, to make a
repair.
TABLE 12.1  Grid 6. The Configuration of the Disorganized Attachment Pattern With Clinical Markers
& Interventions
 
CONFIGURATION
OF
DISORGANIZED
ATTACHMENT
DISORGANIZED
CLINICAL
MARKERS &
INTERVENTIONS
DISORGANIZED
1
Caregiver
characteristics:
state of mind with
respect to
attachment
• Unresolved/fearful
Patient state of
mind
Therapist common
reactivities
• Unresolved/fearful
• Overidentifies
with one part
• Confused
• Worried
2
Caregiver
characteristics:
behavioral
hallmarks
• Frightened or
frightening
• Disordered
Therapist
metaskills to
counter caregiver
hallmarks and
therapist common
reactivities
• Reliable/constant
• Calm strength
• Boundaried
• Collaborative
3
Response to
arousal of the
attachment system
• Collapse
• Disorientation/confusion
Desirable adaptive
action
• Affirm relational,
self, categorical
emotion adaptive
action tendencies
4
Seeds of resilience
• Survives trauma
Goals of
interventions
• Internal security
• Bear and
understand
profound distress
• Wholeness

 
CONFIGURATION
OF
DISORGANIZED
ATTACHMENT
DISORGANIZED
CLINICAL
MARKERS &
INTERVENTIONS
DISORGANIZED
5
Characteristic
nervous system
activation and
affect regulation
• Overwhelm
• Fragments affect
• Freeze
Working with
nervous system
and affect
regulation
• Titrate work
within window of
tolerance
6
Defense:
characteristic
defenses against
relatedness
&
Defenses vs. relatedness:
• Incomplete expressions
• Caregives/controls
• Threatens or collapses
Working with
defenses against
relatedness
• Cultivate safety
with relatedness
and emotion
• Build self-
compassion
• Distinguish parts
and their roles in
surviving trauma
characteristic
defenses against
emotion
Defense vs. emotion:
• Numbs
• Dissociates
• Displaces
Working with
defenses against
emotion
• Affirm and/or
amplify glimmers
of safety, links
between traumatic
history, current
experience, and
dissociated affects
• Empathize with
dilemmas
• Validate affective
glimmers
7
Anxiety:
characteristic fears
• Fright without solution
• Falling apart
• Attachment without
solution
Working with
anxiety
• Build capacity for
self and dyadic
regulation
8
Patterns of affective
competence (or
lack thereof)
• Not feeling, and not
dealing
Building affective
competence
• Distinguish past
vs. present
feelings
• Build tolerance
and capacity to
process emotions
and relatedness
9
Self–Other
relational
patterning
• Unable to rely on self or
other
• Unformed areas of self
• Role reversal
Working with Self–
Other relational
patterning
• Build Self-to-Self
and Self–Other
collaboration
• Build receptive
affective capacity
with therapist and
between parts of
self
10
Internal experience
& external reality:
disconnects (à la
Fonagy)
• “Alien self”
Connecting
internal experience
& external reality
• Build self-
reflective capacity
• Understand self
and other

(Pando-Mars, 2016)
(Note. These are nonexhaustive lists)
Copyright © 2025 Pando-Mars
Many patients who are struggling with unresolved trauma have deep pockets of
unbearable, unwilled, and unwanted traumatic aloneness (Fosha, 2000b, 2021a;
Lamagna, 2021) Thus, they do not expect or have much experience with repair. To the
contrary! When we can show up, even somewhat faltering, and we meet patients with
calm strength, repeatedly, over time, we have the potential to alleviate the suffering of
disruption and the scary anticipation of being terribly alone, with no one to rely on,
with the isolation that comes from being mistreated and misunderstood. Our efforts to
stay in connection and do what it takes to seek repair can go a long way toward
reducing unbearable aloneness and building trust in the process of working together.
Whether reducing the patient’s experience of being alone with us, or being isolated
from parts of themselves, repair is a deeply important avenue of healing. We address
the factor of unbearable traumatic aloneness throughout this chapter.
Goals of Treatment
When working with a patient who manifests disorganized attachment patterns, and
whose state of mind is unresolved/fearful, building their capacity to trust Self and
Other is a primary goal of treatment. Grid 3 identifies all of the categories: self,
relational, and categorical emotion action tendencies as desirable adaptive action for
bringing healing to disorganized attachment (see Chapter 6, pp. 192–193). The reason
for recognizing and affirming self and relational action tendencies is that with this level
of disrupted and disordered attachment, the patient is usually in need of building their
capacity to be with self and parts of self, while also building their capacity to be in
relationship with another.
It is not uncommon for these patients to be bewildered about what happened to
them. This is especially true in cases of deep neglect when what went wrong were not
errors of commission, but rather errors of omission: what was absent (Fosha, 2000b,
2003, 2021a). Such deep failures of the attachment relationship to provide regulating
and reliable protection and care leave gaps in how individuals develop their capacity
for self-trust and self-understanding. Therefore, we aim to help patients to recognize
markers of adaptive self-action tendencies by encouraging them to listen inside to
recognize what they need and find ways to express their need to care for themselves.
We also listen for fractals of self experience (Fosha, 2013a) that arise in small bits, to
allow them into awareness as parts of the patient’s self emerge, as resources or that
enlarge their capacity to bring access to formerly dissociated affects and memories.
We also support patients to recognize markers of adaptive relational action
tendencies, helping them learn to recognize when they are able to interact with
another in a collaborative way that allows both accessibility and boundaries in
relatedness. In a disorganized state the patient may vacillate between seeking safety
with the other and rejecting the other’s response of contact and care. It is helpful to

hold the possibility for both/and as opposed to either/or (Pando-Mars, 2016), since in
disorganization these circuits of moving toward another and feeling safe may be at
odds. Treatment needs to proceed slowly and with care to enable splintered-off selves
to coexist, while building a large enough window of tolerance so that eventually it
becomes a window of opportunity for corrective emotional, relational, and self
experiences. Through adaptive self-action tendencies and relational accompaniment,
patients with disorganized attachment have the potential to build their capacity to
recognize what is safe and trustworthy in themselves and in others.
Additionally, when patients lack a full picture of what happened to them, they may
have dissociated aspects of their experiences. They might have memories of hostile,
abusive, or neglectful caregivers, minus their own related emotional experiences. They
might have strong emotions, become dysregulated easily, or have upwellings of
emotion that seem out of proportion to what is occurring in their current life, yet they
lack a clear understanding that makes sense to them of why that might be. Here,
another goal of treatment is to help these patients locate evidence of their historical
trauma or build connection between dissociated areas of their experiences. Often,
patients may sense an emotion without understanding what they are feeling, or why.
Yet as we make room for their emotion, a memory or realization might emerge that
gives them a piece of their puzzle and moves them closer to constructing a coherent
and cohesive autobiographical narrative, which as we know is a key aspect of
attachment security (Main, 1991). We seek to help them make sense of their reactions
with understanding, compassion, and concrete interventions for processing heretofore
unprocessable experiences and building their capacity to move forward in their lives.
Categorical emotions have adaptive action tendencies (Frijda, 1986), which are
also named as desirable adaptive action for disorganized attachment. Healing what is
unresolved by its very nature means to resolve (i.e., complete what was previously
incomplete and unresolvable). Many of our patients who experienced unwilled and
unwanted aloneness in the face of unbearable emotion need not only our relational
accompaniment to undo their aloneness but our relational attunement and skillful
attention, as well as our highly specific interventions to help them face, feel, and
process what was profoundly distressing in the past. In the wake of processing
emotion to completion, the adaptive action of emotions is released. Tendencies exist
within each emotion for expressing behavior and a readiness to achieve a kind of
adaptive, evolutionarily wired in end result (Frijda, 1986). Helping these patients to
experience, bear, and process their emotion offers opportunities for not only
processing emotion but also for completing incomplete actions, releasing the
emotions’ adaptive action tendencies, and thus strengthening their underdeveloped
capacities and thus developing their resilience (Russell, 2015). These are all corrective
emotional experiences.
Here is an example of how the action tendency of anger can become available to a
patient in psychotherapy. When a child was unprotected during attacking and
aggressive behavior of a caregiver or loved one, and was frightened, their behavior of
dissociating by dropping into a dorsal vagal or a freeze response was how they
navigated their fear or the onslaught of further attacks. This is how the action of
inaction becomes a coping strategy, indispensable to short-term survival, devastating

to long-term functioning. In a therapeutic relationship, we help the patient to
experience the original fear (with our accompaniment, working to stay within their
window of tolerance), which may then allow anger to surface. Core anger fuels the
energy of self-determination and helps the patient find the words to speak up on their
own behalf; or perhaps to stop the attack or find a recourse, as an organismic
response. Helping patients through what may have been frozen in “trauma time” and
helping them process their anger to completion enables them to discover that
assertion and self-protection exist and can emerge from within them when these
adaptive action tendencies are activated. When the conditions are right for expression,
an individual can thaw what was frozen and liberate their capacity to stand up on their
own behalf and reorient their potential for navigating through life with their protective
sensors online and at the ready.
From the Get-Go
The infant does not need to acquire first-hand all the knowledge and
experiences necessary to survival. Instead, the infant needs to develop the
skills for sharing affective evaluations and intentional states with others. This
allows the infant to participate in the cultural learning processes of human
society. (Lyons-Ruth, 2006, p. 597)
Lyons-Ruth says it so clearly in the above quote. Survival is not based on acquiring
firsthand all that one needs to survive. Those are the innate capacities wired into us,
available from birth on. We can change the word “survival” into healing for our
patients in psychotherapy. What is truly needed for healing is understanding self and
other, in keeping with Bowlby’s (1969/1982, 1973) goal-corrected partnership,
Fonagy’s (1995) existing in the mind of another, and Fosha’s (2000b) addition of
existing in the heart and mind of another. Lyons-Ruth identifies the way this happens
is by developing skills, which is having the practice of sharing affective evaluations and
understanding the intentions of self and other. Helping patients to share affective
states and perceive intentional states with another is central in the work of healing
attachment trauma; its importance is heightened when working with disorganization.
This applies both to relationships with others and relationships between the self and
parts, for when a part of self has been cut off for survival, making contact and
bringing each part to the table is essential.
Under conditions of maltreatment, an individual does not develop their self-
reflective function along a singular progressive pathway (Fonagy & Target, 1997).
Rather, they evolve along varied pathways, influenced and molded by many dynamic
interactions. According to Fonagy (2002), fractionation describes how the reflective
function can split off, which is a more accurate depiction of what happens than
underdevelopment. We see aspects of fractionation in some patients with disorganized
attachment—for example, when patients have a compulsive longing to be adored and
yet can’t tolerate the experience of being adored. For some of them, there is a
revulsion toward the younger self, who was criticized and denigrated in the past. In

turn, the patient has come to despise their younger part. The patient isn’t able to have
an integrated receptivity to love as a result of the opposing interactions that gave rise
to these distinct pathways of experience. Another example of fractionation is the
separation between a patient’s memory and the affective states of younger parts.
As we aim to help patients build self-trust, to realize that they are worthy of being
cared for and understood, we also extend this to each of the parts of self that have
been fractionated and sequestered for survival. Lamagna and Gleiser (2007) specialize
in work with individuals with complex trauma and write about the need for building a
secure internal attachment, specifically addressing the need for intrarelational safety
and trust, as well as establishing interpersonal relatedness (Gleiser, 2021; Lamagna,
2011, 2021).
Right alongside building their self-trust is our intention to help our patients with
disorganized patterns of attachment build trust in an Other, first in us as their
psychotherapist, who they can discover is available and capable of helping them. We
aim to reestablish trust and coordination between our patient’s innate attachment
behavioral system and our own functioning caregiving behavioral systems. Hence,
healing requires the patient to bravely undergo facing and reworking their inner
representations of Self and Other. And they need to be able to recognize that we are
trustworthy to help them. Fonagy’s query into epistemic trust explores how this can
happen.
Epistemic Trust
Fonagy elaborated his thinking about “mentalization” (the current term for self-
reflective function) as attachment-based understanding of self and other. In secure
attachment, when individuals understand the intentional states of mind of the other,
they are better able to understand and explain the behavior of the other. Fonagy
became interested in how adaptation to the physical environment and social
knowledge were transmitted through attachment relationships. He recognized that
experiences of secure attachment help an individual build the capacity not only for
mentalizing but also help form epistemic trust, which is “trust in the authenticity and
personal relevance of interpersonally transmitted information” (from Wilson & Sperber,
2012, in Fonagy & Allison, 2014, p. 372).
Epistemic trust occurs when an individual is willing to consider new knowledge
from another person as generalizable and relevant to the self (Fonagy & Allison,
2014), which is what may be necessary for psychotherapists to help our patients to
feel helped. Fonagy identified that people grow to understand the world around them
through communication from a trusted source, and that the child’s trust in their
attachment figure is based on the attachment figure’s sensitivity and ability to convey
their understanding of the child to the child (Fonagy & Allison, 2014). When a patient’s
usual means of learning through their attachment relationships was compromised,
how psychotherapists can become a trusted source is pivotal.
We need to help our patients to have a new experience, and more specifically, a
new corrective experience (Fosha, 2000b). We need to be able to help them where

they do not expect help is available. Epistemic trust describes the mechanisms by
which psychotherapists help our patients to feel a sense of felt security. If they can
have a sense of us at their side when they are used to being painfully alone, they may
begin to risk starting to rely on the relational support that they never had. They might
cautiously be willing to let go of old strategies that seemed like the best protections
and try new ways of being. The following case example shines a light on the process
through which a therapist becomes a trusted other. The therapist’s use of self,
affective attunement, and skilled responsiveness all combine to become a worthy
other to whom even the most frightened patient can begin to turn to with a building
sense of trust.
Additionally, Fonagy’s study of epistemic trust brought attention to an opposing
need, that of epistemic vigilance. Epistemic vigilance is the need for “caution and
discrimination on the part of the juvenile-observational learner to prevent them from
being tricked or misinformed, intentionally, or not (Sperber et al., 2010b, in Fonagy &
Campbell, 2017). When a person has been mistreated, abused, or neglected, a kind of
hypervigilance is often employed when the person has little faith in the trustworthiness
of another. Safety isn’t a given, especially when folks have been raised in conditions
where they have not felt seen and understood, nor received help when needed. With
this in mind, developing epistemic trust seems invaluable for psychotherapists to foster
as we go about seeking to set conditions for our patients to open to new experiences
in the process of psychotherapy—namely, helping our patients to feel they can trust us
to be of help to them.
Case Example
Recently I saw a clinical video of an AEDP therapist working with a patient whose
presenting issue was her sense that she was caught between fears of overwhelm and
detachment. The therapist recognized the relationship between the two,
understanding how the patient was defending herself from overwhelm by detaching
from emotions. We can see this as an example of the therapist’s understanding
(mentalizing) about the patient. The patient also reported a considerable amount of
emptiness and exhibited notable anxiety. This AEDP therapist works from a somatic
orientation, helping patients to build connection to their base of being in the body. She
trusts the value of emotions and their adaptive action tendencies. The therapist also
holds that being overwhelmed is the experience of trauma, which is an AEDP stance
toward trauma (Fosha, 2000b, 2021a), and took to heart her responsibility to not
retraumatize the patient.
Working within the patient’s window of tolerance. The therapist promised the patient
that they would proceed slowly and approach her affective experience with her careful
attention to pick up activation and tend to it. The purpose was to protect the patient
from overwhelm and needing to use detachment to manage it. The therapist
suggested that together they would find the patient’s window of tolerance (see
Chapter 2 for discussion) so that enough activation could be experienced to surface

material, and yet there was enough regulation so that the patient could tolerate what
was arising. When signals of anxiety appeared in the patient, the therapist was
intentional to back off, to not push forward, and ease up where it seemed too loaded.
When anxiety was on the rise, she would track how it was increasing, and she was
flexible to shift gears and proceed with care. They focused on the patient’s breathing
to regulate her.
Proceeding by titrating the emerging emotion. As the work unfolded, a feeling of
adaptive anger emerged. The therapist suggested that the patient see the anger as if
it were on a screen, so she could observe it from a distance, and together they could
explore it. Indeed, this provided a measure of titration in which the patient was able to
turn down the dial of intensity, increasing her sense of control and safety alongside
the therapist’s close attention and accompaniment.
Therapist’s sensitivity and responsiveness. I was struck by how this intervention on the
therapist’s part, more than 30 minutes into the session, was such an excellent
example of how the therapist remembered the patient’s fear and found her way to
effectively help her patient when she needed help. The therapist understood the
patient’s presenting fear of overwhelm, and truly helped her navigate the terrain of
her affective experience so that she could safely explore an emotion. Such an apt
example of therapist responsiveness seemed the perfect stage for the patient to have
an experience of epistemic trust. She could lean into the suggestions of an
“attachment figure” and gain access to a calmer, more relaxed way of being, allowing
her to explore and learn about herself with new affective competence.
Patient’s experience of epistemic trust. At the end of the session the patient
acknowledged how she felt protected by the therapist. The patient was aware that she
didn’t need to worry or take care about the boundary of the therapist, which was
relieving to her. Out of this new experience, she wanted this new thing for herself: she
found a new trust in the possibility of working together with another person in a way
that not only did not hurt her but actually helped her. Here is evidence of her growing
epistemic trust. What she gained through this experience opened her “willingness to
consider new knowledge from another person as trustworthy, generalizable, and
relevant to the self.” Having an experience of epistemic trust begets the desire for
more connection and communication, and potentiates the possibilities of developing a
collaborative, effective psychotherapy treatment.
The Therapist Stance: Therapist Common Reactivities and Therapist Metaskills
In preparing to meet a patient who may have disorganized attachment, our
foundations of AEDP are an important first order. Set the conditions to establish safety
and undo aloneness. Provide welcome, interest, and look for glimmers of
transformance to affirm in the patient. Find some aspect of the patient to affirm, to
appreciate, to delight in, to love. With an intention to notice what is going right when

patients arrive to psychotherapy, we can often offset the patient’s expectation of
shame or even doom that “needing help has come to this!” And as pictured in the
above case example, listening with an ear for how we can be of help, and addressing
the patient’s concern through an attentive, responsive capacity to help where help is
actually needed, seeds the conditions necessary for therapy to be helpful and
effective.
Disorganization may not be apparent at first. A patient might present with another
primary attachment strategy or perhaps some of the control strategies that developed
around disorganization. Yet, some patients may present with a quality of something
missing that can be amorphous due to an emptiness of inner contact, a sense of not
really knowing what happened. For these patients, something feels off in their life and
they want help to understand what they might even need. Emotions may surface, yet
the patient has difficulty relating what they are feeling and what it may be about.
They might have difficulty trusting others, yet not understand why or even that the
possibility of trust can be had. Sometimes patients with disorganized attachment
vacillate between longing and fear with the therapist. Liotti (1995) describes that
patients with disorganized attachment may express different and incompatible
attitudes and feelings toward the therapist and/or their self, across many sessions or
in rapid succession during the same session.
Therapist Common Reactivities
Here it can be helpful to recognize some therapist common reactivities that might
appear in working with a patient with disorganization; they include confusion,
overidentifying with one part, or worry.
Therapist becomes confused. Sometimes the therapist notices discrepancies in what
the person is saying and feeling. In the AAI research, Main found while in conversation
with the interviewer, the discourse of the interviewee revealed lapses in reasoning and
faulty logic, which indicates disorganization. Alternatively, the interviewee would be
drawn away from the immediate context of the interview and then return with a
notable gap in continuity. There were often long silences (up to 90 seconds) as the
interviewee was caught by extreme absorption (Main et al., 2005).
In a psychotherapy session, when a patient is approaching an area of wounding, it
is not uncommon to see the pattern of faulty logic that Main observed in the AAI.
When such lapses in reasoning occur, the therapist might become confused.
Considering the origins of such confusion and noticing when the logic of the patient
doesn’t hold together might be a clue that we are in the terrain of unresolved trauma.
Such discrepancies in logic might also herald the possibility of fragmentation between
parts of the patient or fractionation in the patient’s self-reflective function. At the
beginning of the therapeutic relationship, the possibility that the patient has
disorganized attachment may not be immediately apparent, and yet when we find
ourselves noting discrepancies between what the patient is saying or feeling, or we

find ourselves confused, this may indicate that the patient may be showing signs of
dissociation or fragmentation.
Therapist overidentifying with one “part.” The therapist might try to make sense of the
discrepancy or faulty logic by leaning into one part of what the patient is saying.
Sometimes one part of the patient convincingly steps forward, seeming to take a
stand, bringing order to what had been chaotic and disorganized. Something appears
to have shifted and settled. I remember a patient whose primary love relationship
fluctuated between extremes. One day, she arrived at a session after she and her
partner had one of their earth-shattering fights. She declared that this was the last
time she was going to tolerate such emotional abuse. She looked me in the eye and
said, “I really mean it.” She considered leaving, and described how she would support
herself living separately.
The first time this occurred, I believed she was finding her core strength and that
my role was to support her courageous, self-affirming move to decide that she was in
an intolerable relationship and had the right to choose to leave. I had seen signs that
reverberated with her experiences of childhood abuse and appreciated her moving
toward acting on her own behalf. Inadvertently, I was supporting the apparent
strength of one part of her, without realizing that this was a fractionated expression,
and that a counterpart might be excluded, yet nearby.
The following week, she arrived at the session and reported feeling reconnected to
her partner. Her fury was out of sight, and she was clearly in a different place. She
seemed disconnected to what was said the week before. I was quite thrown and
disoriented. This gave me pause to realize that this apparent “undoing” was actually a
different part of the patient surfacing. She was operating from an opposing drive in
her that was driven by her longing for connection. I began to realize that what I had
seen as an adaptive action to move away from a volatile and triggering relationship
was actually a state that was not free to act, for the fact that it excluded her relational
need for connection. While in hindsight this seems obvious, I was at first confused. Yet
I learned how fragmentation and fractionation operates when it surfaces with the
emergence of contradictory parts. This led me to the intervention of holding
awareness that multiple aspects of experience reside side by side and need to be
invited into the room. The need for understanding parts and ego states is necessary in
working with patients with disorganization.
Feeling worried or fearful about the patient. When I find myself repeatedly concerned
about a patient, I need to attend to my concern, consider if information was disclosed
in our session, maybe even in an off-handed way, that I had not fully registered at the
time that is now rising to my awareness. Perhaps I need to notice if there are any
aspects of our interactive communications that need further addressing and
containment. Has there been a miscommunication that seemed minor but the patient
continues to reference it? Am I concerned that the patient may be a threat to self or
to another? Do I have concern that the patient is being threatened and might be in

danger? These are important considerations and sometimes our nervous system’s
neuroception may be signaling an alarm.
It behooves us to take care and be thorough in our considerations, to be present
and focused about how we raise our concerns with patients, holding AEDP Maxim 4,
The Unit of Intervention Is Not the Therapist’s Comment but the Therapist’s Comment
and the Patient’s Response to It. Our concern could be triggering for the patient. Even
here, especially here, as we hold our responsibility to attend to the patient’s safety, we
may also be faced with the patient’s feelings about our concern. Before naming it,
what rises to the level of concern for us might have been outside of the patient’s
conscious awareness, which might impact the patient and require careful processing
on a number of levels: our relationship with the patient, the patient’s relationship to
self and parts of self, and the patient’s relationship with others.
Therapist Metaskills
A few intentional sensitivities, being reliable, constant, boundaried, embodying calm
strength, and holding a collaborative stance can be helpful and stabilizing to therapists
when working with someone in a disorganized state or who has disorganized
attachment.
Be reliable, constant, embody calm strength. It is important to hold that the conditions
of the relationship and our way of being give rise to attachment security or insecurity.
So even when someone presents with huge developmental trauma, our capacity to be
constant, reliable, and embody calm strength goes a long way to establish conditions
for secure functioning with patients. At first, it might be that the patient feels safe
enough to say how lost they feel. Some folks with disorganization may have
developmental gaps, which can come across as unformed areas of experience (Fosha,
2013a). By adulthood, individuals who developed disorganization as an infant often
have learned to disconnect from their unbearable affects and may use dissociation to
varying degrees as a coping strategy to manage overwhelm and aloneness in times of
anguish. So while they may not “know themselves,” by our holding steady and offering
a place to land, we can help them get to know what has been lost and out of sight to
themselves.
For these patients fear of fear is often looming. They have been frightened and
helpless. Some have been themselves frightening and out of control. To offer a calm
presence is regulating, often “going beyond mirroring” to helping is necessary and
indicated when a patient is exceeding their window of tolerance and anxiety turns to
panic. When patients have cognitive disruptions and lose the capacity to focus, they
may become disorientated and/or agitated. By understanding that the terrain of
working with disorganization is to expand the window of tolerance within a
collaborative alliance, we can approach these edges with an eye to see what is needed
to assist and accompany the patient.

Case Example
Here, I present a case vignette that demonstrates the early steps of establishing the
focus of individual work with a patient who is showing signs of dissociation, as the
quality of fear mounts in the background. This is Abigail, from Chapter 11, whose first
childhood memory was being a toddler who woke in the middle of the night to “cats
and dogs raining on the roof,” a memory that she brought up 2 weeks after the
session I describe below.
I had seen Abigail for 14 sessions of couple therapy, which ended 8 months prior
to this session. Her husband agreed for her to engage in individual psychotherapy with
me. Abigail returned to therapy when she was feeling “stuck, trapped, and depressed.”
She felt confusion about her relationship with her husband, and ultimately that she
had to “go it alone.” She noted anger about having and expressing needs. The session
that follows was our third.
Case Vignette 12A, Part 1: “I Want to Know What Happened to Me”
Abigail began with an external focus about whether her husband was the right guy for
her. She was lying on the couch, and as she spoke, a quality of sleepiness and
emptiness drew my attention. I asked her to sit up, which was an up-regulating
intervention and initiated a deeper unfolding. This vignette begins 20 minutes into the
session when I ask what is happening in her body to shift her attention away from
“thinking” about her husband and toward focusing her awareness on her experience.
ABIGAIL (PATIENT, PT): Anxiety . . . heavy, dense, and dead. Scared. Almost like I’m
gonna get raped, reminds of date rape, let him do what I didn’t want, shut down,
painful . . . not that but similar. Especially if he does anything aggressive. I get
scared and close down (her head is bent over, she is looking down). So it’s just
awful . . . [Her discourse is associative, yet turning to her own experience,
something seems to emerge.]
THERAPIST (TH): Mm-hmm. So what’s it like to even say that, just to tell me, and just to
kinda be here so far? [I focus on what’s happening in the present moment
as she shares with me, to offer dyadic regulation.]
PT: Not good.
TH: What’s the part that’s not good right now? [Clarifying the generalized
judgment]
PT: I just feel so broken, you know, so, like so, it’s not a normal response to having
sex, you know (she looks down and away, closing her eyes).
TH: When you close your eyes, I kinda get the sense like, there’s a little shame maybe?
Like you’re closing your eyes around this when you’re saying you’re broken . . . [I
name the shame explicitly and describe what I see happening in the
present moment between us. My language “kinda get the sense like . . .”
matches her tentativeness. This is happening right brain to right brain.]

By my mirroring that Abigail closes her eyes when she says she feels broken, I let her
know what I see and that I sense shame. However, I do not presume that I am right
about her experience. Thus, I then ask her to notice what is her experience. My
intention is to foster a collaborative alliance, to respect her capacity to register what
she is feeling rather than my simply naming, or interpreting, her behavior. She drops
into a deeper place by identifying more about her experience than her judgment.
PT: I feel really kind of . . . starting to feel really little. [She speaks in clauses,
describing what she feels underneath the judgment of “feeling broken.”]
TH: Mmm.
PT: Little, and I just wanna like be curled up, you know? (she puts arms around her
knees, pulls them up to her chest, and tucks her chin into her left shoulder) . . . and
be left alone. [Her language is simple and reveals a helpless expectation of
being alone.]
TH: What are you feeling right now? Just right now? Just be with it. [I ask her to pay
attention to what’s happening in the present moment and to be with it.]
PT: I’m checking in and out a little bit. What happens a lot of times with this is, I kinda
go up here . . . (raises right hand up from in front of her torso to her head) [She
describes dissociating, and that it is familiar to her, which gives the
impression that anxiety may be arising.]
TH: Yeah . . .
PT: And I feel my . . . almost make myself unconscious (brushes her left hand over her
head and behind). It sounds weird, dizzy. [She describes a defensive strategy
to shut down what may be overwhelming—dorsal vagal response is
becoming activated.]
TH: So I want you to look, if you can, to make contact with me, because I feel like we
need to work together. [AEDP Maxim 3: Stay With It and Stay With Me] And
I’m afraid when your eyes are closed that you may dissociate a bit . . . that you’re
going away . . . [sharing what I perceive, in the effort to be collaborative].
(I mirror her movement by putting my right hand over my head) [I am matching
her without my conscious awareness.] So let yourself see what happens if you
let yourself see me and be with me. I really want to go with you. I don’t want you
to go too far on your own, because this is scary and it’s a hard journey . . . So what
happens if we make eye contact? [I invite her to explore what happens if she
lets herself become aware of seeing me with her, and I self-disclose my
intention to accompany her.]
Stay with it and stay with me. Here, Abigail is cooperative and my orienting her to
engage her somatic awareness puts her in touch with emotional experience operating
at a level below her self-judgment and shame. Yet her resources are limited, and she
resorts to dissociation to avoid a state that may be familiar and unbearable if not
dissociating. By moment-to-moment tracking, I check in with each step of her
experience, which next brings her attention to describe how she is shutting down,

which she describes as “sounding weird,” judging herself, which she immediately
follows with “dizzy,” a body-based description of dissociation.
I invite Abigail to make contact with me. I am concerned that she is managing
overwhelm with defensive dissociation. The intervention, stay with it and stay with
me, offers explicit accompaniment, to help her to regulate her experience with me,
dyadically, instead of alone. By asking her to explore making eye contact with me, I
want to engage her senses and see if we can help her know if she feels she is safe
enough with me.
TH: Umm . . . (I start cooing tenderly upon seeing her face soften and become young)
PT: (nodding, looking at therapist, sighs noticeably) I feel sad. [She clearly states
her emotion, which tells me that our contact is giving her support to be
with her experience and that she is accessing an emotion that seems to
be within her window of tolerance.]
TH: You feel sad. [Mirroring her words closely demonstrates that I am hearing
and being with her.]
PT: (nods)
TH: So I want you to just start with that, to let it be.
PT: (tears up, looks at therapist, takes breath in and out) [She responds,
coordinating with therapist, resonating right brain to right brain, and
engages her feelings more.]
TH: (looks with concern and care, breathing in and out, seeming to be in rhythm with
the patient) Pretty deep sadness, huh? (both of us are nodding, holding eye
contact) Pretty deep pain around this stuff . . . [Affective resonance; explicit
empathy conveyed by my words, voice tone, and eye contact.]
PT: I feel really alone. It feels like that little . . . (drifts off) I close my eyes sometimes
because that helps me go there, too (hunches shoulders). [Now she shares what
she knows about her experience to help me understand her, which
furthers our collaborating.]
TH: (slowly) Right . . .
PT: Really little, alone, kinda confused, like not knowing what to do and just
disassociating, you know? [Notice fragments of speech and shifting back and
forth between feeling alone and feeling with me.]
TH: Right, and that’s why I want us to slow that down. Because I understand, yeah, be
in touch with the little one, on her own, but I’m here, and it’s really important
(fingers motion back and forth between the two of us) that we stay connected to
help, to help that little one. [Offering therapist self to provide nurturing and
comfort; dyadic regulation, while inviting the patient to engage her own
instinctive turning toward the young one in herself.]
PT: (head drops down and gentle sobbing begins . . . breath comes in as body racks a
bit, holds, and goes out, she looks back at therapist) [Connection with self and
with therapist is engaged.]
TH: (very gently) Where are these tears coming from?
PT: (crying renews, lips tremble)

TH: Just stay with them, I’m here. [I back off as I realized I had asked a
reflective question too soon and want to privilege being with her feeling
first; in saying “I am here,” I offer dyadic affect regulation.]
PT: (blows out her breath) There’s a lot of anger in there, too.
TH: Uh-huh . . .
PT: And the anger, I just felt so alone . . . I didn’t have anyone to help me. [Connects
to the source of her feeling so alone in the past. More capacity for feeling
adaptive emotions is in evidence.]
TH: So much aloneness and the anger that you were so alone with no one to help you.
[Staying with her, explicitly mirroring]
PT: (nodding, continues crying)
TH: Ohh . . .
To receive help stirs the realization that help was missing in the historical past. When
patients have an experience of receiving help, there is often a realization of what was
missing. For Abigail, her realization stirs an adaptive feeling of anger. She notes the
experience of tightness in her jaw, which she describes as “killing her.” First, I invite
her to be with the experience of anger in her jaw—however, she shifts back to crying.
Then, I return to the new experience of connection happening between us, which had
given rise to her realization of how alone she felt and having no one there to help her.
Here the choice point is to strengthen our alliance and our growing rapport; she does
not have to be alone with her emotional experiences.
TH: Ahhhh . . . When I say I’m here and I want to be with you and help you, how does
that land? Makes you realize what wasn’t there, kind of stirs up anger . . .
[Relational metaprocessing to register the impact of our interactions on
her experience]
PT: Yeah . . . (deep breath in and out) [Regulating breath] There’s part of me that .
. . I just want to know what happened to me. [Discontinuous statement, which
heralds an important aspect of her treatment.]
TH: Yeah. You want to know what happened to you . . . ooh. [I repeat her words to
reflect I am hearing her.]
PT: (nodding, starts crying some more) [As I resonate with her, she lets go into
more feeling.]
TH: Such a vulnerable place . . .
PT: (shaking head left and right) I don’t know . . .
TH: You don’t know, ohh. [I reflect that she doesn’t know and add an empathic
para-verbal.]
PT: (shakes head no, pained look, takes deep breath) I just feel young. It feels
younger than my date rape and all that stuff when I was older.
TH: Uh-huh, mm-hmm. I want to know, too, and I want us to find out together to see
if we can be with you in a way that . . . [I explicitly join her desire to know
what happened. Also, I perceive a deep quality of pervasive aloneness,
and am explicitly intervening to undo her aloneness.]

PT: (exhales deeply) [Receptive moment]
TH: We can just follow what you feel and see where that takes us. [Inviting bottom-
up processing of the experience.]
Transformance glimmers bode well for our therapeutic alliance. When Abigail begins to
turn her attention to her body and what is happening internally, she becomes
overwhelmed. Once I reflect her experience and am explicit about being in contact
with her, she connects with emerging sadness. It is amorphous, undefined, yet seems
adaptive, not pathogenic. She has no clear picture of where it is coming from other
than a young, sad place. When I offer a hand of support, she senses and feels angry
about what she didn’t receive in the past. This moment heralds a deepened feeling, a
body-/emotion-based recognition of how alone she had been with no one to help her,
which arose as she was receiving help from me. These movements between my
interventions and Abigail’s deepening process are glimmers of transformance that
bode well for our working together. In this early session we are establishing safety and
undoing aloneness, which is evidenced by her dropping down into core affect and the
realization that she wants to know more about herself. She is speaking to me as an
older, wiser other who she sees is providing help—markers of growing epistemic trust.
Organizing Experiential Work With AEDP Representational Schemas
We explained the AEDP representational schemas used to guide experiential work in
Chapter 3, “The Move to Experience and Transformation,” and we applied them in
Chapter 8, “Working to Transform Patterns of Avoidant Attachment,” and in Chapter
10, “Working to Transform Patterns of Ambivalent/Resistant Attachment.” To work with
disorganization, we continue to provide specified versions of the representational
schemas for psychotherapists to track, which include five categories from Grids 1 and
2, Row 3 and Rows 5–8: (a) patient’s response to attachment system arousal, (b)
nervous system activation and affect regulation, (c) how defenses and (d) anxiety
manifest, and finally, (e) the patient’s affective competence (see Chapter 5). These
categories are related to the AEDP TOE: defenses are represented on the upper left
corner, anxiety is represented on the upper right corner, and core affective experience
is represented on the bottom corner.
The TOE (Chapter 3) provides a schema upon which therapists can track a patient’s
behavior toward and away from affective experience. In disorganization, the
experiences of both affect and relatedness are complex. In the above vignette we see
how the patient’s experiences were shifting among partial memory, association, self-
judgment/shame, dissociation, and the core emotions of sadness and anger. When I
closely tracked and reflected Abigail’s experience, she was able to make use of our
dyadic regulation, and the somatic focus helped to organize her experience; each
subsequent piece that emerged was meaningful. My providing explicit relational
accompaniment was key to Abigail’s accessing her sadness and touching into her
experience of unbearable aloneness.

As described in Chapter 3, the TOE has two versions. The self-at-best is
transformance-led functioning and is driven by safety and hope. Defenses are soft and
more flexible and when anxiety arises, it is mild and has the quality of a green signal,
which is marked by openness to experience. The self-at-worst version of the TOE is
resistance-led functioning and is driven by dread or threat. Defenses are more
inflexible, can be embedded, and include shame-based self states. In a self-at-worst
state, anxiety and also shame, both conceived of inhibitory affects, have a red signal
function.
It can be helpful to normalize shame and anxiety, and both need to be regulated.
The above vignette with Abigail provides an example of how the therapeutic
relationship offered a stabilizing function that helped her be in her self-at-best in which
she was open to feel into the compromised version of herself, self-at-worst, while
being in connection with the therapist. We established that she would not be alone in
the present day with her feelings that were related to how alone she had been in her
childhood.
Next, we describe the markers and behaviors of anxiety and defense on the TOE:
disorganized.
The Triangle of Experience: Disorganized
Anxiety. Anxiety is represented on the upper right corner of the TOE (see Figure 12.1),
which is activated by attachment needs of their own or another, related to the
patient’s anticipation of “fright without solution.” It may also be related to the patient’s
anticipation of “attachment without solution,” in which the patient may be lacking a
template for an older, wiser other who would be available to help them. In the
absence of a trustworthy attachment figure, some individuals adopt a role with others
in which they become caretaking and controlling. The anticipation of no one reliant
(Grid 2) can give rise to anxiety about being overcome by emotion and falling apart.

Figure 12.1 The Triangle of Experience: Disorganized
Pando-Mars, 2024, adapted from Diana Fosha, 2020

By the time some of these folks are adults and arrive to therapy, they have a
mixture of coping strategies to manage their anxiety, such as shutting down,
dissociation, and fragmentation. When they are unable to use a defensive strategy to
cope, their anticipation of fright without solution or attachment without solution may
trigger a collapse in strategy, in which helplessness and intense fear of being hurt
again come to the fore. This is the realm of pathogenic affects and unbearable states
of traumatic aloneness, on the maladaptive side of the bottom of the TOE, which we
discuss in the section on core affective experience.
Defenses against relational experience. Verbally, when patients have difficulty finishing
their sentences, trail off, and stop speaking for an extended period of time and/or
resume in a disconnected fashion, we are in the terrain of incomplete expressions, a
hallmark of disorganized discourse as identified in the AAI. Therapists may find
themselves confused about what is happening in these inchoate, fragmented ideas
that seem to be nonsequiturs. It might be that unresolved material is activated in the
moment. Or that by the time many of our patients have become adults, these speech
patterns have become habitual and are indicative of the fragmentation that lies below
the surface.
Defenses against relational experience appear when an individual takes either a
threatening position toward another, or a submissive position. Control takes the form
of the individual’s need to have their own way, to an extreme with little capacity to
compromise. Excessive caregiving is another defense against relatedness, an
outgrowth of role reversal when the individual has little experience of being on the
receiving end of care from an “older, wiser other.” Sometimes collapse can also
become a strategy, when an individual falls to pieces in a desperate plea to enlist the
attention and care of another and also to altogether avoid the emotions associated
with the situation at hand.
Defenses against emotional experience. Defenses are represented on the upper left
corner of the TOE. In the face of threatening overwhelm, by the time many of the
disorganized children reach adulthood, dissociation and being numb become defensive
strategies they have mastered to protect themselves against emotional experience.
During sessions, approaching these dissociated emotions can provoke a loss of focus
and cognitive disruption (which might be the kind of lapse in discourse that shows up
as a prolonged silence or difficulty staying on track). A shift in posture, fogging over,
spacing out, or the light going out from the patient’s eyes may indicate dissociation.
Anxiety is often the culprit behind such dissociative defenses, the fear of being
overwhelmed and alone with unbearable emotion produces a shutting down
awareness of that emotion.
Fragmentation and displacement are also defenses against emotional experience,
which are used to manage the terror, humiliation, and despair that is often a result of
traumatic aloneness with the underlying and unresolved attachment trauma. Affective
experiences and memory may be disconnected from each other and sequestered to
protect the individual from the intrusion of these affects and memories. However, at

other times the defensive barriers do break down, which is what has become referred
to as “trauma time” (van der Hart et al., 2010), when a person is overtaken in current
time by unresolved emotions and memories from the past. Sometimes “subparts” may
suddenly pop out, when the barriers against these splintered-off affective states give
way.
The TOE is embedded in the bottom of the SOE triangle, which is discussed after
the following vignette. We discuss core affective experience with the SOE triangle.
Track the anxiety that precedes dissociation. In the following vignette, we return to a
session with Abigail that took place 2 weeks after the first vignette. She is beginning
to track her dissociation at home, and notices that she often feels sleepy with her
husband and children. I explore what happens in the here-and-now between us to
help her to regulate the anxiety that I believe contributes to her use of dissociation.
Abigail’s disorganized attachment was the result of neglect and deep deprivation, from
her experience of being alone and untended for hours at a time as a child. Currently,
she had a strong capacity in her work life and was able to function with an avoidant
strategy, high intelligence, and good rapport with people. However, in her intimate
relationships the precarious edge of unbearable aloneness at the core of her wounding
was just below the surface, which she had been quite adept at keeping at bay through
the use of avoidant strategies and dissociation. Until our work together.
Case Vignette 12A, Part 2: Letting in Care
We begin this vignette with an exploratory question. Since Abigail began to feel sleepy
in response to our interaction that just preceded this moment, I am interested in
whether she is aware of some anxiety that may have precipitated a dissociative
defense.
TH: I wonder if even our contact made you a little anxious like if that’s new, to have
me on your side being affirmative of you or seeing the big picture. What does that
feel like? [Making the implicit explicit; exploring the experience of contact
between us, platforming with empathic elaboration.]
PT: Hmm, yeah. It’s definitely something.
TH: How do you know it’s something? What does it touch? [Connect to what is
happening moment-to-moment in her inner experience.]
PT: I feel a little anxious, feel a little anxiety. [Signal affect]
TH: Where? [Identify the physical experience.]
PT: Here. (waves her hands up and down in front of her torso)
TH: In your core? [I use evocative words to help her name and hopefully
deepen her experience.]
PT: Mm-hmm.
Explore anxiety. Since anxiety is rising while we are speaking about the contact
between us, I turn my attention to exploring her anxiety and I ask her to give it

words. It may be coming up due to implicit memory, a right-brain experience.
Speaking from the anxiety may help her to regulate, by putting words to her concern.
It also might help to organize her experience by potentially giving voice to her
expectancies or what she may be anticipating.
TH: So if that little anxiety is going to speak, what words might be there? [Using
words brings the left brain online, which can be regulating, as well as
informative.]
PT: I’m scared like somebody might be nice to me. (looks younger) [Shift into State
2, core affective phenomena: relational experience.]
TH: You’re scared cuz somebody’s being nice to you? [I shift into a small voice like
talking to a child.]
PT: (nodding)
TH: What’s someone being nice to you going to do? [Explore the anxiety.]
PT: I don’t know.
TH: You look really scared; I see it in your face. [I reflect what I see, and attune
to her by speaking in a tender voice.]
PT: (nods)
TH: And sad too . . . [I name feelings as a mother reflects to a small child.]
A: (nodding)
TH: Just stay with it, just let it have some room. Is this okay? [Making space to be
with her feeling, and asking permission to guard safety.]
PT: (nodding, closes eyes for a second)
TH: Is it too much? Is it okay just this much? (she responds nonverbally, shakes head
left to right) What do you see on my face when I’m being nice to you? What do you
see now? [Asking for her perception of my expression.]
PT: (slowly) You’re being nice to me (in a small voice).
TH: How come I’m being nice to you, I wonder. Do you know why I’m being nice to
you, where it comes from? [I continue deepening her perception and
reception by asking her to reflect on the experience, to see if she might
understand where I am coming from. I sense we are in unknown
territory.]
PT: You understand me? [Click]
TH: Yeah . . .
PT: I feel like pain . . . right here and right here (points to her shoulders).
[Constriction, physical defense, another part emerges]
TH: So what would the pain say if the pain was going to go into words? [Explore this
part]
PT: Like all in up here . . . (points to her neck and shoulders)
TH: That just came up, so just listen to it, see if an image comes, or words. (we both
have slight nods of our heads, syncing with each other) Anything come to mind?
PT: Just pain.
TH: So I just want to say . . .

PT: Tense, here and here (she brushes from the back of her neck to the front with
both hands)
TH: I just want to say, when you say, “I understand” that I’m being nice to you, I’m
understanding—do you feel understood? Or are you thinking I’m understanding you,
which is why I’m being nice . . . [I circle back to reconnect with her
experience before the pain and constriction emerged.]
We stay with the fact that I am “being nice” to Abigail, and her voice sounds like she
is coming from a much younger part of herself. She looks a little bewildered and
speaks hesitantly, which might reflect that she is between two parts of her experience.
She tells me she feels pain in her shoulders. But then she says the following:
PT: It’s like, like, you, you care . . . [She perceives me accurately, although she
continues sounding hesitant. I wonder if she is unsure that she can say
this in therapy or if overall, the experience is unfamiliar.]
TH: Yeah, that actually feels like what I feel. [Validating with kind, reassuring
tone in my voice.]
PT: (nods) Mm-hmm.
TH: Like I care about you, and out of caring, I want to understand. And . . .
PT: Wanting to be with me and understand me, yup . . . [Now she is clear that she
gets me and lets me know that she is perceiving my care.]
TH: Now, what’s happening as we acknowledge that there’s caring, that you can see
caring and that’s where that comes from? How does that feel . . . to the part that
feels scared or pain? [I elaborate the experience of being with another who
wants to understand her and care for her; I invite her to process the
experience, with attention to the part of her that was feeing scared.]
PT: I don’t know. I’m just going with it, but it just um, I had a flip to feeling really little
again. [So directing my question to the part that felt scared brought her
into feeling little again. This is an AEDP State 2 experience: accessing a
different ego state or gaining access to a younger part of herself. As we
make contact and make the relational experience explicit, she “flips” to
being little.]
TH: Hmm, a flip to feeling really little again. (I mirror the same flipping gesture with
my hand as she does with her hand) [Mirroring gesture—physical attunement]
PT: Back there.
TH: Right now? [I am trying to locate where this flip actually took her.]
PT: When I was in tears, felt really small again, like when I was 4 years old. [She is
referring to the prior session, which was in the previous vignette, 12A.]
TH: What’s it like to feel that 4-year-old? Can the 4-year-old part feel the caring, feel
my caring? [Processing the experience of her younger self from her being
in her self-at-best, open, and able to describe her experience. I also check
for the receptive affective capacity of the younger self. This was at least
two interventions—yet they land and move the process.]

PT: (nods slowly, looking deeply into my eyes) [Begins to gaze at me. Signals that
she is taking in the caring I offer.]
TH: I’m glad, actually. What’s happening right now?
PT: (brushes across, referring to her shoulders) I’m just conscious of the anxiety and
my body reaction.
Here, we stayed in eye contact for an extended time. There was no defense, and
Abigail’s anxiety calmed way down. Earlier in the session she said that she doesn’t
bask in the positive. Now, we were gazing into each other’s eyes, with a simple purity,
right brain to right brain. Abigail named how she felt herself just being with me (core
state). I am struck that in these moments, we were basking in eye contact.
Before these moments of contact, Abigail and I were exploring the activation that
came up in her relationship with her spouse and her children. I noticed how we were
treading in the zone of dorsal vagal shutdown. By helping Abigail to understand that
her sleepy defense was meaningful and then helping her to stay present and engaged
with me, a strong feeling of connection and ease arose between us, though not
without tension and a constrictive aspect emerging first.
Years later, Abigail told me how being with her children when they were small was
incredibly activating and difficult for her. And we recognized how she was struggling
with her own unresolved state of mind after growing up with her psychotic mother
who really was unable to be present and available with her.
In this session, we have a corrective relational experience through gazing—patient
and therapist—perhaps infant and mother, or mother to young girl. In a place that was
once incredibly stark, marked by such deep aloneness, we arrived at the fullness of
pure contact. Instead of initiating fear, sleepiness, and avoidance, contact with me in
the here and now brought Abigail to recognize the felt sense of care and being cared
for. Our connection felt like a warm and nourishing balm to the soul.
With recognition came new awareness of more parts of herself. Abigail identified
that right before our gaze, she had experienced pain in her shoulders, and realized it
was coming from her critic/protector part. The protector was on the verge of swooping
in to take her away. When we metaprocessed the experience of eye contact, she
realized that while she was having a new experience of connection, the protector was
also there, as a reminder of its vigilance and resolute way to keep her together and
safe. However, she had the sense that this time the critic voice was outside of her.
What was truer and more real was our contact and the simplicity of being together. In
addition to having a new experience of relational contact, her capacity to reflect on
her experience and with a sense of inner knowing and self-understanding was
expanding.
The SOE Triangle (With Embedded TOE): Disorganized
The SOE triangle (see Figure 12.2) is the AEDP representational schema that depicts
the relational matrix surrounding a person’s internal working model: the individual’s
internalized representation of Self, the individual’s internalized representation of Other,

and the individual’s internalized representation of Emotion and its processing. These
representations can change according to the relationship, and whether one’s
environment is experienced as safe or threatening. For this, we have two versions of
the SOE triangle: the self-at-best and the self-at-worst (see Chapter 3, Maxim 8,
Working With the Self-at-Worst From Under the Aegis of the Self-at-Best, pp. 124–
125) and Chapter 5, pp. 147–150). When psychotherapists establish conditions of
safety with our patients, we help them to access their self-at-best, a hope-driven
state. Being in connection with us and open to their own experience supports their
capacity to work with their self-at-worst, a state driven by dread. In self-at-best, the
individual’s internalized representation of the Other is realistic; even if problematic, the
individual is able to maintain perspective to see the there clearly. The individual’s
internalized representation of their Self is effective. They are able to stay connected to
themselves and act appropriately to the situation.
The constellation of self-at-worst manifests when there is threat in the environment
or the individual is triggered and gets thrown into “trauma time.” The individual’s
internalized representation of the Self is compromised, while the individual’s
representation of the Other is triggering. We have modified the SOE triangle to each of
the insecure attachment patterns: in Chapter 8 to avoidant attachment, in Chapter 10
to ambivalent/resistant attachment. Here, we describe what happens in disorganized
attachment.
On the disorganized SOE triangle, a self-at-worst constellation, the individual’s
representation of the triggering other is characterized by the Other’s
unresolved/fearful state of mind, and their behavioral hallmarks of being frightened or
frightening, or disordered. The experience and interaction between the child and their
primary attachment figure is what sets the stage for the individual’s internal working
model. Here, the individual’s internalized representation of the Other is frightened or
frightening, or disordered. Consequently, the individual’s representation of their
compromised Self is characterized by disorganization. The Self is represented as
frightened or frightening, disoriented or confused. Their internalized representation of
Emotion is characterized by fear of falling apart; affective competence (or lack
thereof) of not feeling and not dealing. Emotion is often represented as overwhelming.


Figure 12.2 The Self–Other–Emotion Triangle (With Embedded Triangle of Experience):
Disorganized
Adapted from Diana Fosha, 2020
There are multiple combinations that can occur in the representations of
disorganized attachment, ways in which the individual perceives Self and Other. The
caregiver’s unresolved trauma impacts their capacity to function as a caregiver when
they are triggered; thereby they are unable to feel and unable to deal with their own
affective state, much less respond to their child. There are many permutations that
arise in the internal working models of children growing up with parents who are
unresolved. Some individuals’ internal working models hold their own Self-
representation as frightening, from seeing in response to their needs how their parent
would get triggered. Or the individual’s Self-representation may be disoriented and
confused, when they cannot seem to communicate their needs to their parent, and
subsequently they develop an internalized representation of the Other as disordered or
frightening. Some of the children developed role-reversal strategies, and instead of
leaning into their attachment figure, it’s as if they became a pseudo-attachment figure
for their parent. They may develop a Self-representation related to the role of
caregiving, stepping in to control their caregivers who were rendered helpless by their
own trauma-based fear. The role-reversed kid may develop an internalized
representation of the Other as helpless or incapable.
In psychotherapy, when a patient is confronted with the potential of someone who
could be an attachment figure responding to them with help and care, they may have
difficulty in a number of different ways. They might take charge and become
controlling of the therapeutic interaction. They might become anxious or fearful. Or
they may feel that they are in unknown territory, confused and unfamiliar with the
possibility of having someone explicitly there for them. An important part of working
with disorganized attachment is for psychotherapists to aim to provide new and
corrective relational experiences that set the conditions for the patients to be able to
trust their perception of a trustworthy other, starting with therapists.
The need for titration. One of my patients was overwhelmed by the potential of
allowing herself to feel me with her. She described feeling like “if you’ve been anorexic
and you haven’t been eating and you finally decide you’re going to eat, it would be
dangerous to eat an entire sandwich.” She imagined that if she were to allow herself
to let her guard down, she “would lose control because she is just so hungry.” Another
patient couldn’t imagine letting in my care, and when for a moment she did find
herself drawn to feeling nourished, fear showed in the whites of her eyes. The idea
that I might be a caretaker threw her into a quandary. It felt overwhelming. She said,
“The floor just drops out, nothing to stand on. . . .” These examples are vivid
descriptions of the “black hole of trauma,” when the offer of relatedness triggers
intense fear, and a fear without solution at that.

Therapist common reactivity. Offering help that is sorely needed, but wasn’t had, can
rock the foundations for some of our patients, and can be upsetting for therapists as
well when it is not received and it is even triggering. When the conundrum of
“attachment without solution” is triggered in a patient, we might feel worried and
want to back away from activating them further. Yet the therapist metaskills of
constancy and embodying calm strength can be stabilizing for both therapist and
patient. It can be helpful to recognize how important it is that the patient is
communicating their experience. Our work is to stay engaged, to both respect the
patient’s window of tolerance and provide enough contact to meet at the edge of what
is tolerable. Here, we can build safety through talking about the patient’s experience
through responding to their imagery or sensations to convey understanding, while also
titrating the experience of relatedness.
Holding a space that both gives the patient room to feel into their experience,
while having a new experience of being attuned to and listened to holds the intention
of being in it together, while distinctly meeting what the patient is going through. For
example, to explore with the person who fears the danger of eating an entire
sandwich, to imagine taking a small bite or a sliver, and then see what happens. For
the person afraid of collapsing with the offer of a hand, what might happen if we were
to offer a pinky? Or if we remove the “take” from “caretaker,” can they feel the
therapist’s care? Or if possible, to acknowledge and respect the patient’s fear of
collapsing and explore the experience of collapse from a distance, the way the
therapist earlier in this chapter helped the patient to explore her anger as if it were on
a screen. Since unbearable aloneness is such a major part of the black hole of trauma,
finding our way to undo the patient’s experience of aloneness in incremental steps is
key: to neither move too far away and risk exacerbating their aloneness, nor move in
too close and risk overwhelming our togetherness.
Working With Emotion and Core Affective Experience
At the bottom of the SOE triangle and the TOE is core affective experience, which
includes categorical emotions, self-affective experiences, and relational affective
experiences. Affective experiences can be maladaptive or adaptive. Maladaptive
experiences include pathogenic affects and unbearable states of traumatic aloneness
(see Chapter 3, pp. 105–106), which are prevalent in disorganized attachment
resulting from “fright without solution” and “attachment without solution.” For some,
the offer of providing what was sorely missing is frightening, and the fear of collapse
and overwhelm is hugely triggering, as described in the above examples. Here
collaboration between therapist and patient is essential. We are also on the lookout for
self-affective experiences and relational affective experiences (to help patients restore
self-trust and trust in other).
In working with disorganization, we want to help the patient make links between
their current life experiences that are triggering and their past unresolved traumatic
experiences that are at play. By making room to attend and explore affects that may
have been previously dissociated, our aim is to provide corrective emotional and

relational experiences to ultimately help the patient to mobilize adaptive action on
behalf of their self. We can explore specific memories through the use of portrayal, in
which we locate and reenter a representation of a scene with the intention to provide
a different outcome, one that provides a corrective experience. An outcome through
which emotion can be processed, aloneness can be undone, and the patient’s self-
agency and efficacy can be restored.
The following vignette (which we introduced in Chapter 11) shows portrayal work
with core affective experience during the third of this series of sessions with Abigail.
She opened this session by asking if she ever told me her first childhood memory. She
remembered waking up terrified by the pounding sounds of a heavy rainstorm. She
got herself out of her crib and down the pitch-black hallway to find her parents’ room,
which is where her memory stopped. When as an adult she asked her mother if she
remembered the big storm and what happened, her mother told her how surprised
she had been to find Abigail at her bedroom door. When Abigail asked her what she
did, her mother said that she put her back into her crib. We enter the following
vignette about 20 minutes into the session, after three or four failed attempts to
engage an experiential focus in our work. After some reflection about what was so
frightening that her memory stopped, I reach out to the little one who does remember
feeling afraid. Reentering this part of the memory, with the channels of experience
that were available, provided the entry point we needed.
Case Vignette 12A, Part 3: The Move to “I’m Worthwhile”
TH: How can we be with that little one in you, because it feels like that was so
important, and that impulse to get what you need is so valiant and courageous and
right. [I want to restore her motivational vector toward reaching out to an
Other for comfort and protection.]
PT: Uh-huh, yup. I don’t remember the part of her putting me back in the crib. I only
remember the part up until I got in the room and saw her, and my memory is blank
after that . . . [When her adaptive action in response to her fear was not
recognized, she reverted to the oldest neurological circuit, the dorsal
vagal complex, and shut down.]
TH: So I wonder what makes that the part you don’t remember. Like why do you think
that would be the part you don’t remember? [Inviting mentalizing about her
experience]
PT: Because as terrifying as this whole thing was, that was probably the worst part of
it. [Recognition of being alone when she was so terrified.]
TH: Reaching out and having someone not get you . . . [Empathic elaboration]
PT: Or just putting me back in the situation where I’m scared. [She elaborates in
the spirit of collaboration.]
TH: Mm-hmm.
PT: And alone . . . ohh . . . [Nonverbal emphasis about the impact of being
alone with her fear]

TH: So I feel like there’s a little, little one in you, a little 2-year-old who’s still holding
this. I want us to somehow touch her or feel her or let her know that we want to do
it differently. [Setting the intention to build connection between the
dissociated parts of herself.]
PT: Yeah, I don’t have a lot of feeling connection to that. It’s like I’m telling it but I’m
not feeling it. [Disconnection/dissociation]
Situating the patient properly in affective space (Panksepp, 2009). In AEDP terms,
“properly” is being with another and in touch with the somatic, sensory elements of
emotional experience to facilitate bottom-up processing. Abigail has difficulty finding
and offering comfort to her young self. In the next segment, I ask her to tune into the
channels of experience (Hanakawa, 2021; Mars, 2011), which are awake to the
memory. This is similar to lighting up the neural networks in eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR; Parnell, 1999). [We begin processing by
noticing what is happening and building a platform from there.]
PT: I remember seeing the dark, like it was dark and shadowy and I felt really little cuz
the hall walls were so big. [Visual channel of experience]
TH: So big. [I enter the memory with her by echoing what she says.]
PT: And bang, bang, like huge bangs on the roof. [Auditory channel of experience]
TH: Oh yeah, so the hearing’s really . . .
PT: I’m trying really hard with my hand; my hand is going against the wall like this,
trying to find my way . . . (shows how she was reaching to touch the wall with her
fingertips) [Sensation channel of experience]
TH: Yeah . . . feeling that feeling in your hand, and hearing the sounds just letting that
. . . cuz those channels are awake to this memory. [Deepening the experience]
PT: And the pictures of the cats and dogs . . . [Visual channel]
TH: Pounding, falling down on the roof . . . [Amplifying the sounds: hearing] I’m
seeing you. I’m seeing this little baby girl in the dark, young enough . . . [I witness
her to provide an experience of being seen (Adler, 2002).]
PT: I think I might have been less than 2 because I’m holding the wall because I’m not
a great walker.
TH: Ohh . . . (tender nonverbal cooing)
PT: I’m having trouble, like, I’m not . . . (she stares off)
TH: Yeah, stay. Stay here . . . maybe take in . . . see me seeing you, because you
know sometimes when you go into that . . . [I see her starting to dissociate
and bring her attention to our relational contact for dyadic regulation, and
make an explicit self-disclosure] because I just want you to know that I see
this little, little one in the dark and that if I’m the mom, what I imagine, is just
picking you up immediately, and just picking you up, and, and I imagine like
listening with you to the sounds, like wow, “It’s really loud isn’t it? It’s loud, ohh you
must be scared if you came here, right, you must be so scared.” [I feel compelled
to enter the scene and provide the missing help and empathy that was
needed.]

PT: Mm-hmm.
TH: Ohh, and then maybe you would say, “cats and dogs, roof . . . oh no.” (tone of
concern) I would say, “you hear cats and dogs on the roof, that’s a saying, it’s
raining, really hard raining. It’s really loud.” [To give the terrified child an
accurate understanding of the phrase “it’s raining cats and dogs”]
PT: It’s like cats and dogs, like dead cats and dogs landing on the roof, tons of them.
[She lets me know the picture she imagined as a child.]
TH: “Dead cats and dogs” (said with strong emphasis), how awful, what an awful
image, yeah, yeah. What happens if I say, “It’s not cats and dogs. It’s just rain, rain,
rain?” That’s just how we speak about it, but it’s really rain. What happens?
[Metaprocess]
PT: I feel some relief. [Postbreakthrough affect]
TH: So feel that relief, where do you feel it? [Notice the somatic aspect of the
feeling.]
PT: I felt like “a ahh, ahh, ahh, haaaa . . . ” (nonverbal sounds of release)
TH: Do you want to stay with me? Do you want to stay with your mom? [Explicit
caregiving response]
PT: (nods)
TH: Of course you do, I want you to stay with me.
Consciously filling in a missing element. I explicitly name my immediate, instinctive
desire to reach out to the scared baby girl, to offer comfort as a mother would to a
child. I am cognizant that I am Abigail’s therapist and we are in a psychotherapy
session doing portrayal work. And the imperative to step in to offer what was clearly
missing was strong. I trust I am coming from my own affective competence, being
present in myself and present with her, making a conscious choice, attentive to what
happens next. The unit of intervention is the therapist’s intervention and the patient’s
response to it. (Fosha, 2000b).
PT: That’s what I wanted. [Click of recognition]
TH: I want you to stay with me. I want you to stay with me . . . [Affirmation,
amplifying]
PT: (starts shaking and sobs) [Core affect]
TH: Keep breathing . . . yeah, just feel into it. [Dyadic affect regulation; making
room to feel the emotion, to let it move]
PT: I feel like she didn’t want me. [Verbalizing her core wounding]
TH: Ohh.
PT: I wanted her to want to take care of me. [The reparative longing]
TH: Of course you did. Yes . . . yeah . . . yeah . . . ahhh, yeah . . . yeah . . . [Deep
affirmation of her longing] Just be with that, you wanted her to want to take
care of you . . . of course you did. So much . . . uh-huh. You got yourself out of
your crib and down the hall in the dark, holding on to the wall. Such a brave girl.
Ooohhhh.

Corrective relational experience. In the above scenario, I saw the little baby girl as so
valiant and brave to get herself what she needed, and in this imaginary scene we are
able to have a redo. Instead of being put back in bed, the little girl is seen for what is
terrifying her, and offered understanding and comfort. When the patient feels seen
and cared for, she immediately realizes what she wanted and didn’t receive, which was
that her mother would understand what she needed and respond to her.
In the following segment we metaprocess what occurred between us. This
corrective relational experience holds the potential to impact the patient’s internal
working model, to shift her self-representation, helping her to integrate how her self-
perception is impacted by being responded to.
TH: And what about you . . . what does it tell you about you that what was evoked in
me was just wanting to take care of you. What does that tell you about you?
[Relational metaprocessing]
PT: That I’m worthwhile. (her voice is hesitant)
TH: Uh-huh. Is that a question or are you letting that in? Feel into it, feel into it
because I think that’s a really important recognition.
PT: You know, I just internalized that there was something wrong with me.
[Recognizing shame and the compromised self-representation of her
disorganized internal working model]
TH: Yeah, that needs to be dispelled, right?
PT: Yeah.
TH: Cuz you made a valiant effort to get something that you needed and you deserve
to be given that comfort. Check in with me as I’m saying this, right? I just want to
know if you can take that in if you’re needing to shut down a little or . . . [I was
seeing her close her eyes, so I checked in with her.]
PT: Say it again . . .
TH: That I see that you made this valiant effort to get what you needed and you
deserve to be responded to.
PT: I feel very angry. [Underneath the shutting down and the shame is anger.]
TH: Yeah. How do you know that?
PT: I feel, I just feel angry. It’s all well and good that we can sit here and talk about it.
You can pretend to be my mom but it doesn’t make up for what happened.
TH: Yeah.
PT: There’s like this feeling of like just anger and like I have to deal with the
repercussions of this so deeply in my life, you know, and it wasn’t my fuckin fault.
[Core affect of anger, with the adaptive action of releasing her from being
at fault.]
TH: Anything else you want to say to her from this place, as you’re waking up to
yourself? [Inviting a mini portrayal, to express her feelings to her mother.]
PT: I really, really, really wanted to have a mom who would look at me and see me like
that, and kinda smile or not smile but soften and take me in her arms and feel loved
and just be taken care of. That’s what I needed. [Recognition of her core needs]

TH: Yeah. What you needed and what I want to add that you totally deserve.
[Affirmation]
PT: (nodding) I deserve that and should have had that.
Building the reflective capacity. In the above vignette, I asked Abigail, “What does it
mean about you that what was evoked in me was wanting to care for you?” When she
said, “I’m worthwhile . . .” she was identifying a shift in her internal representation of
Self to one who deserved to be responded to. When a child is responded to,
accurately reflected, and able to rely on their attachment figures, they feel loved and
cared for; they feel known and develop the capacity to know themselves; they develop
agency and security in relationships. These interactive layers of support are the
building blocks of the capacity for self-reflective functioning or mentalization. When
self-reflective function is fractionated by dissociation, the self is compromised. When
parts of self that hold affective experience are met and tended to, knowing and self-
reflection can flow between these parts of self and within the individual as a whole.
The capacity to think about one’s feelings and feel about one’s thoughts leads to self-
understanding and the ability to understand another (Fonagy & Target, 1997).
In the final moments of the above session with Abigail, I asked her about her
experience of the session and our work together. Her response actually pointed to the
beginnings of our developing epistemic trust and the newness of her experiences with
me.
TH: How is it for you if we review where we started out with this memory and finding
your way into it and getting what you got about your mom and you?
[Metaprocessing the arc of the session]
PT: It was interesting. For a long time I felt like I wasn’t getting, you know like getting
into it, you know, and then it was kinda good, we kinda found the way in. [She
recalls the failed attempts to get somewhere.]
TH: Yeah. How is it that we weren’t finding our way in, and then we just kept shifting
around? [I metaprocess her experience of this aspect of our work. It’s all
grist for the mill.]
PT: It was fine, it was good. That was good. Um, it was great. And I know I feel like
we always get to it one way or the other. [Trust emerges.]
TH: Uh-huh. What’s that like? What’s that like that we always get to it one way or
another? That you can say that? [Staying with the emergent, I continue to
metaprocess.]
PT: It’s good. Um, like I said, this isn’t the usual experience in therapy for me. So
that’s really good. It feels very different. [She articulates the corrective nature
of the experience.]
TH: I mean, it feels like that’s something about us like how it is to do this with me and
there’s something about us that’s just . . . [Here, I receive her experience and
reflect that I also see that we have a connection to work from.]
PT: It works, yeah. I was telling Jim, I do. I feel like you’re remothering me in a way I
definitely. . . . You have a lot of that mom energy for me, which is really nice. So

thank you. [She names the corrective emotional/relational experience.]
In AEDP, we engage metaprocessing interventions to help patients reflect on shifts in
their experience, especially new and positive ones. By asking a metaprocessing
question, we help the patient who is having a new and corrective experience to know
they are having it, to feel what it means that they are having it, and to feel what they
feel by having the new experience. Questions like “How is it that we weren’t finding
our way in, and then we just kept shifting around?” and “What’s that like that we
always get to it one way or another? That you can say that?” get patient and therapist
engaged to reflect together on what they have just processed and experienced, and
what has unfolded. We process their response as thoroughly as possible. Sometimes
this deepens the embodied experience of the shift. Sometimes metaprocessing
unleashes another round of core affect, as happened when Abigail felt angry about
how her life was affected by her mom’s lack of capacity to understand and respond to
what she needed. And sometimes metaprocessing helps us to get a sense of how we
are working together and can make the implicit explicit about our process.
Reflection fosters meaning making, which can lead a patient to increased self-
awareness and increased self-understanding (i.e., Abigail’s recognizing her core
attachment needs). The aspect of self that is aware of having a feeling, knowing one
is having the feeling, and having a sense of connection and meaning about the feeling
is hugely important in psychotherapy. Reducing fractionation in the self-reflective
capacity can help patients to shift out of outdated internal working models into
updated self-representations—shifting from a self-at-worst (compromised) self-
representation to a self-at-best (effective) self-representation. AEDP’s use of
metaprocessing as a key mechanism of change not only enhances integration but also
helps patients to heal fractures in their reflective function.
In working with disorganized attachment, helping our patients to have new
experiences of receiving care gives rise to a feeling of self-worth, promoting a new
self-affective experience. To have an experience of self-worth arise out of interaction
with a therapist may also feature a new relational affective experience. Having new,
corrective self and relational experiences gives rise to transforming internal working
models of self and other. In the following section, we present work with a patient who
is beginning to understand how her experience of growing up with her mother, who
was unresolved from her own trauma, was a significant influence in the patient’s
relational patterning. In addition to the therapist’s active engagement to provide the
patient with attuned care and affect regulation, the patient also realigns her own
caregiving behaviors to attune to the needs of her younger self.
Working With Role Reversal
Lyons-Ruth (2006) describes the two types of controlling strategies identified in the
Berkeley Longitudinal Study (Main et al., 2005). Children who grow up with caregivers
who are unresolved for their own trauma may develop: (a) controlling-caregiving, in
which they control the parent’s attention and involvement through caring, nurturing,

entertaining, and organizing the parent; or (b) controlling-punitive, in which they
control the parent’s attention and involvement through angry, coercive, demeaning
interactions with the parent.
The final case example depicts the first strategy of controlling-caregiving, in which
the patient, Sylvia, oriented to become her mother’s caregiver. When a child is faced
with “fright without solution” in their parent who is unresolved, confusion often arises.
The child sees the parent in a freeze state or tranced out, which can evoke the
caregiving system in the child, turning them away from their own needs as they
become hyperaware of their parent’s fragility. In the following vignette, this kind of
interaction with her parent is an example of “attachment without solution,” which
initiated a pattern of role reversal in the patient and led to confusion in her adult
primary relationship around caregiving. We enter the session when the patient is
making peace with her confusion, which up to this point has made it difficult for her to
establish boundaries in her current partnership. We stay with this newfound self-
acceptance around the patient’s confusion to establish her self-at-best as a
springboard for the session.
The session progresses through an exploration that leads to the origins of Sylvia
taking the role of protector and locates the child part who was overexposed to her
mother’s trauma and took on the role of protector. It shows the complexity of what
can happen when fear goes untended. In the session, as the patient faced aspects of
her previously dissociated experience, our dyadic regulation was crucial to helping her
stay with what was unfolding. We engage the use of a portrayal to help the patient
reorient her adult self to care for her inner child and to release the child from the role
of being the mother’s caregiver. The selected vignettes show the highlights of the
transformative process of the session.
Case Vignette 12B: “Walking Into the Fire”—Uncovering and Restructuring Role
Reversal
State One Work—Following Transformance: Befriending confusion leads to feeling
more real.
THERAPIST (TH): Please elongate (touches fingertips and pulls hands apart) to really
open into what you are finding in yourself. [Detecting transformance. I invite
her to deepen into the new experience]
SYLVIA (PATIENT, PT): I see, it feels to me like seeing more clearly. I see my confusion. I
don’t have to get rid of my confusion anymore. I see it. It’s being human. I feel the
energy of it. It’s like this murky, can sort of sometimes be panicked, um. And now I
feel like my confusion is my friend. I don’t have wisdom. [From self-at-best she
is able to have perspective and even to befriend her process that at times
becomes activated and confused.]
TH: (rocks back and leans in) Wow. What’s that like to see? [Metaprocessing her
new way of being with her confusion.]

PT: That’s the thing. It’s not trying to fix my confusion or get out of it. It’s accepting it
and then, um, and actually I am appreciating these glimpses of being more real.
[By accepting herself as she is, she describes a self experience with the
action tendency that she is feeling more real.]
When possible, begin the session with affirmation, which in this case was the
affirmation of the patient’s transformance glimmer of seeing more clearly, and then
metaprocess. In this segment at the opening of the session, the patient is having a
new, positive experience of confusion, which has been a problematic area in herself,
and as we do in AEDP, we take a moment to metaprocess the new experience, which
generates a platform of self-at-best for what follows.
The following interaction sequence developed in response to the patient’s attempt
to figure out what to say when she needed a boundary with her partner. My sense was
that early material was triggered and preempting her from having access to her own
knowing in the present moment.
Exploring the defense (difficulty of setting a boundary) links to her historical role.
PT: It’s not coming naturally to me. [She is referring to setting a boundary.]
TH: Right. And so that to me, it’s not about me teaching you the right words and you
writing them down and memorizing them. [In a state of high anxiety, she
would ask me what she could say to her partner that would help her to
establish a boundary.] It’s like we have to hold the question “How come it’s so
hard for you to protect yourself by setting a boundary?” [Setting the intention to
explore]
PT: Right, right, right.
TH: Right?
PT: Yeah. Yeah, I think that’s true. (she tears up and gets weepy) I got to find that,
that authentic kind of . . . I got to feel it, and I, why am I not able to connect to
that? Yeah. Yeah. And I think I mentioned before there’s this feeling of, I’m needing
to put the other person first or I don’t deserve to sort of have that protection
because my role is protector. [Identifying how she feels leads to her historical
role.]
TH: Wow, there’s something here . . . like, how do we really pay attention to the
origins of this pattern? Because it’s a pattern and it runs really deep and it goes
back a long way. [Validation and making the implicit explicit—that her role
has deep origins.]
Linking the current-day experience with the historical past. The connection Sylvia
makes is important and I am sure there is a link between her current life issue and her
historical past. By naming that the pattern goes back a long way, I create space with
my words, inviting the patient to slow down, and mark that her identifying her role is
an entry point for experiential exploration.

PT: I’m also walking into fire, you know? And so I’m like going toward it. I’m almost
sacrificing myself. (she winces, starts crying, body shakes as she cries) It’s hard to
say that. [The patient is describing her experience when she takes on this
role of being a protector.]
TH: Let’s be with you here . . . “It’s hard to say it.” [Slowing down, suggesting that
we face this together is dyadic regulation, and I repeat her affect-laden
words.]
PT: Yeah, you know, I’m trying to sort of kill myself or, you know . . . [Intensity
grows]
TH: Wow.
PT: Like it was so trying to destroy myself, so it’s not. [The references are unclear,
which may be a hallmark of nearing unresolved trauma.]
TH: So it’s that really wow, right, right, right, right. (therapist leans in as patient is
leaning over, sobbing) Wow, wow, let’s really be with this energy that wants to go
self-destruct in order to sacrifice for someone else. [I am following her closely
and know she is describing the intensity of self-sacrifice, even if what we
are talking about is not entirely clear.]
PT: (rocking) Yeah, well. I was always, like, so drawn to that idea.
TH: Right. Right. Where does that come from? Well . . . [Exploring]
PT: My mom and, you know, she would tell me stories of her child abuse when I was
way too young. [The link: We are now talking about her trauma in the
shadows of her mother’s unresolved trauma.]
TH: Oh, I see.
PT: So yeah. So I felt like I wanted to protect her . . . right? [Role reversal]
Recognizing the origins of role reversal. The patient is uncovering that self-sacrifice is
what comes naturally to her. In response to my question “Where does this come
from?” Sylvia identifies what was overwhelming for her as a child. Here, we begin to
see why it was so difficult for her to set boundaries. When she was young, she was
unable to engage protective action on behalf of herself. Instead, “needing to put the
other person first” took precedence and was how she took on the role of being
protector: the origins of her role reversal with her mother.
In the following section, I have in mind the possibility to use the AEDP intervention
of portrayal work, using the patient’s imagination to enter the scene and find a way to
be with the younger self who until now was scared and alone and also became the
protector of her mother. Know that even though I enter this piece of work with an
intention, I am listening to the patient to follow the natural next steps as they arise for
her. It is important that our relational alliance is coordinated and is one in which her
healing is ultimately driven by what emerges from within her, albeit with my support
and guidance.
State Two work: exploring the origins of role reversal leads to the traumatic
experiences of the younger self.

TH: So Sylvia, let’s see that little, little, little, little one. [Focusing her attention to
the younger self, who is the holder of her distress.]
PT: Yeah.
TH: That one of you that was so overexposed. [Platforming by collecting the
pieces of what has been named, to focus this next piece of work.]
PT: Yeah. And so.
TH: And, had no one to protect you. . . .
PT: And I just turned it into, well, I’m the protector. Like, I remember I was around
fourth grade when that started to happen, that sort of persona. And I just
remember I think my mom would tell these things and I, I’m sure what I felt was so
much fear. [She reports both the role that she took on as the protector,
while also acknowledging the emotion of so much fear.] I was afraid of my
great-aunt. I didn’t understand why she would still come around after my mom
would tell me terrible stories of physical abuse that were like torture [which the
patient named, but I am not repeating here for confidentiality; and give
rise to fright without solution].
TH: Oh my god . . .
PT: Yeah, she would tell me stories about this when I was in fourth grade. And, and
then this woman would come to our house and I was so confused.
The younger self unburdens what she’s been holding. The session unfolds as we turn
our attention to the younger one. Then, Sylvia began to name horrible memories that
her mother told her, which frightened her. Here is an example of unburdening
(Schwartz, 1997), when a younger part of self that was isolated and alone begins to
reveal and share their memories and affective experiences. As Sylvia speaks and
shares her fear and confusion, I notice a quality of growing detachment that seems
defensive. Suspecting she was at the edge of her window of tolerance, I explore what
was happening with her and sense we are dealing with two neural networks that have
been disconnected before now.
When I reflect her detachment, Sylvia describes that she feels sad for her younger
self but can see that she is also in an analytical frame of mind. I remind her that we
can approach this together, offering dyadic regulation, at which point Sylvia shifts into
being more engaged with our exploration.
Building the window of tolerance by undoing aloneness. The younger self’s need for a
boundary emerges spontaneously.
TH: And is this okay? [Asking permission is especially important when we are
working with patients who are describing a violation in which they had no
choice.] It’s not that I want you to saturate into it. Can you and I be connected,
while you stay connected in your adult self who sees and feels for . . . that little
one? From your adult self who is connected here with me, can you see what your
little self needs because she’s too young to be the protector? [I am providing

both accompaniment and guidelines to unblend her adult and younger
self, in order to help the younger one who has surfaced.]
PT: Yeah. (opens her eyes and makes eye contact with me)
TH: She can’t . . . nobody’s watching out for her. So we need to find her and find out
what she needs. [I sense the adult is present enough, and advocate to
reach the little one and bring her some help.]
PT: She needs to not be told these things. You know, I think she’s like “I don’t want to
know this. I don’t want to hear this.” [Green signal affect—expressing what is
needed.]
Sylvia inhabits her adult self who is now standing in as a protector for her younger
self, expressing that she knows what she needs: “She needs to not be told these
things.” Once the adult self names that she need not be told these things, the younger
one says twice, “I don’t want to hear this.” With this response she is asserting a
boundary, which emerges spontaneously once her adult self steps in.
PT: This is abusive of my mom. You know, it’s like, it’s like to do that. It’s like there’s a
. . . Well, that’s not her. Her language is like “I’m scared. I don’t want to hear this.”
[The adult shifts from figuring out her mother’s behavior, to listening to
her younger self. Then she voices what her younger self is saying.]
TH: So how do you feel toward her when you hear that?
Check the intrarelational field. I am asking how her adult self feels toward her younger
self, which is an important part of intrarelational work between parts of self. I’m
checking to see if they are aware of each other, how they feel about each other, if they
can communicate and listen in both directions. These are important steps and features
of building a secure internal attachment between the adult self and the younger self.
State Two corrective relational experience: Protection shifts away from the mother
toward younger self. Portrayal work.
PT: Protective.
TH: Right. Right. What does the protective energy want to do for her?
PT: Just take care of her and let her know she doesn’t have to play that role. [Clear
corrective message]
TH: Okay.
PT: Yeah, like she shouldn’t . . . (drifts off)
TH: So here, stay with me for a second [my response to her drift]. I’m wondering if
on some level, let’s see what this is like for you to imagine [checking in with her
for her response]. I have this imagining of like on one level, you have your arm
around your younger self and on the other, you have your other arm out in front of
you (my arms show one arm wrapped around my waist and one arm pushing out
the other, hand up in a stopping gesture)

PT: Yeah.
TH: Making some gesture of stop to the mother. Like, can you as the adult move that
impulse to protect your little one with care and take her away, but then also see the
adult in you saying or doing more along the lines of she shouldn’t be told these
things that you said earlier . . . to that overexposure?
PT: “Stop talking to me about this. Stop talking to me this way.” [She speaks directly
as if talking to her mother. And then she clarifies what is at the heart of
her experience.] I could say that. I think a big part of it is some kind thought to
where it’s remembering . . . “You, Mom, are an adult and you are responsible for
taking care of yourself. I’m not going to.” [She declares a limit]
TH: Wow, that’s important. [I repeat her words and tune into the tone I hear in
her voice, focusing on the auditory channel.] Can you hear the tone in your
voice that says, “You are the adult. You’re responsible for taking care of yourself?
Not this little one, right? Not her, not me as her.” Feel the energy of this—it feels
important. [Offering reflection to support and validate her, and
encouragement to feel into her body, via the energy channel.]
PT: Yeah, it’s really hard for me because it’s really hard to go there. [Anxiety stirs]
TH: Okay. Can you keep your eyes open for a second? Pull me in like, let yourself, see
if you can take me with you, if that helps. [Using our relationship to help her
regulate, and checking to see if this makes a difference.]
Working with the edges of the window of tolerance. Notice that anxiety arises with
each new step: First when she hears from the younger self and now as she speaks up
on her own behalf and speaks the truth that her mother was the adult, and she asks
that her mother take responsibility for herself. Dyadic regulation and being in it
together is crucial, and together we have an opportunity to notice the new experience
and to then reflect on it, recalibrate, and digest it. In this case by checking in and
exploring the anxiety, Sylvia reveals that she is up against a prohibition of changing
the role with her mother. By taking our time to talk together we are following a key
element of AEDP, to alternate between experience and reflection to stabilize our work.
Boundary confusion emerges next, around who needs more protection.
State Two work: Working through boundary confusion; accessing core anger and
adaptive action
PT: Right. I have to put her first before that. Yeah, I see that, as a young one, so I get
all sympathetic for that young one [meaning her mother]. But that’s not a young
one. That’s an adult. [The boundaries are confused, and we see how the
patient’s perspective is distorted, yet is coming into view by the process
of exploring what is the correct next step.]
TH: That’s an adult who’s being run by her young one who’s untreated. That’s true.
There’s truth there. [Validation] But the fact is, she was your mother in an adult
body not getting the message that she was out of order. She was untreated for her
trauma. I’m so sorry. And right now, we’re trying to treat you for your trauma. [I

am advocating for my patient, while also recognizing and having empathy
for her mother’s situation of being untreated for her abuse.]
PT: Right? Right.
TH: We’re saying this part of your mom that got taken over by her unbounded,
unhealed, untreated trauma and was dosing it on to you and getting your
attachment caregiving system acting on her behalf rather than her being the
caregiver to you. It reversed the role. Right? So we’ve got to hand that back. [I’m
platforming and also being collaborative, offering psychoeducation to
share how I hold what happened, so that my patient understands my
motives.]
PT: Hand it back, yeah.
TH: Feel into the yeah and find out what’s ringing true for you. [I took a stand about
handing the role back and I want to find out how it is landing with the
patient.]
PT: Well, I can feel it, too. I can tap into anger, like stop-it kind of anger. Just stop it
and take care of yourself. I’m very angry. Stop, stop it, stop it, stop it! [Core
emotion of anger releases an adaptive action tendency.]
TH: Yes. Go for it.
PT: Yeah. No.
TH: What’s happening right now? [Metaprocessing]
PT: I feel good.
TH: Okay, tell me what feels good.
PT: I’m glad I did that.
TH: Okay. Tell me what you’re glad about. Stay with me with this. [Metaprocessing
the new experience of speaking up and declaring a boundary on her own
behalf. Stay with it and stay with me in the context of metaprocessing.]
PT: I don’t know, I want to do that more often. I’m just visualizing her and I see her
and then just have this feeling it’s not okay. And she’s. Yeah, she’s just got to stop.
TH: So good! [Affirmation] What are you seeing when you see her?
[Metaprocessing the relational experience of speaking up to her mother to
see what effect this has on the patient.]
Metaprocessing the emotional expression on her own behalf and then following up
with the channel of experience that opens. Sylvia spoke her anger and set a boundary
by saying stop to her mother. There is a shift internally of feeling that the oversharing
is not okay, which is an adaptive action tendency of the categorical emotion of anger.
While I am listening and looking for a bodily rooted shift, I pick up that she is seeing
something in her visual channel. I follow that by asking her what she is seeing when
she sees her mother, which turns out to be an important inquiry.
State Three: Realization affects, leads to more corrective relational experiences.
PT: She looks very young and not knowing how to take care of me, and very confused.
She’s always seemed in a trance here. [Sylvia’s description of her mother

sounds like the mothers in the early mother–infant interactions who were
unresolved for their own trauma.]
TH: Okay.
PT: Not really . . . there. That’s how I always felt her. Not really there. She was
somewhere else in there, kind of saying things. I kind of want to say, “Go away or
leave me alone or don’t bring this to me, just mine to fix or solve for.” [She is
speaking in incomplete expressions, which might indicate that she is
nearing a disorganized state in her younger self who was seeing her
mother’s tranced-out expression. It might also indicate that in the face of
the new she is feeling some tremulous affects.]
TH: Say that with energy. [I was hearing her slipping into more of a spacing-out
state.]
PT: “So, you know, it’s not mine to fix or solve for you. You don’t. What is that? It’s like
I don’t deserve this. I don’t want this. I don’t need this.”
TH: Yes.
PT: “I am hurt by it. I am afraid. Frightened by it. Take this back and this is yours to
deal with.” [Assertion is a corrective message]
TH: Right! Feel that. [Repeats the patient’s words] “Take this back. This is yours to
deal with.” What’s that like? What’s that like to hear yourself say? [Metaprocess
this boundary setting]
PT: Yeah. “This is yours to deal with.” Huh. “This is yours to deal with.” I, I think this
feeling comes up of how I used to not be able to . . . (she trails off) The
heartbreaker that was that I, I didn’t think she could . . . deal with it. So that’s why
I’d step in. [She articulates the plight of the role-reversed kid. Her mother’s
helplessness was extreme; the child felt the only option was to become
the protector/caregiver.] But now it’s like there’s this feeling of “this is yours to
deal with.” I know if she actually consents to this, whether she does or doesn’t, is
not my job.
TH: Right. Feel that. [Affirmation and encouragement]
PT: And I feel this quality in her that no matter what, there’s something else protecting
her or guiding her. It’s not. It’s not mine. It’s not mine (hand pushes away from her
body and up).
TH: Okay, so let’s notice what your hand wants to say. “It’s not mine.” That came up
organically. That was pretty interesting. Something about you getting to the place
that this is yours [boundary] and whether or not she does or doesn’t follow. . . .
The hook was, she can’t, she’s too weak. Right. But then there’s the 9-year-old who
has the strength to deal with what the adult can’t do. And now you’re seeing she
needs help from somebody who can help her, not a 9-year-old. [Empathic
elaboration]
PT: Right.
TH: Right. And then you say you’ve got a sense of like whether or not she does or
doesn’t go for help to an appropriate place. . . . “That’s not my job!” Wow—right.
What’s it like to say that? [Metaprocess the corrective experience]
PT: Yes. Feels good because I also actually, for me, think that feels the best, it’s kind of
this higher-power concept, like she has her own or whatever form you want to

have.
TH: Yes, like she’s, she has guidance. She has her own wisdom.
PT: Yeah. Yes. Yeah that’s, that’s a good place to land and I am just letting go. Go
feels kind of like go, go find that and go.
TH: Find your own . . .
PT: Yeah. Yeah.
Relinquishing her role as protector. The surprising element of this process was how
the patient was able to recognize that she is not only not responsible for her mother
but that her mother is responsible for herself and has her own capacity (even if
unrealized) to reach for a higher power, or inner guidance, which was liberating. Sylvia
felt her own deserving to be on her own behalf, she shifted where her true
responsibility wanted to be, which allowed her to be in more current time with herself,
rather than being caught in “trauma time” in the role of protector. In the last moments
of the session I metaprocess with her how this is for her to consider.
State Four: Unpacking core state knowing and integration.
TH: Feel into that knowing that she has her own higher power. How does that affect
you? [Metaprocessing]
PT: Yeah. It’s a relief. I don’t want that job anymore. [Declarative—core state]
TH: How’s the 9-year-old in you feeling as she’s witnessing it? She’s seeing what you’re
doing on her behalf. [Metaprocessing the intrarelational experience between
her adult self and her younger self.]
PT: Yeah.
TH: How’s that landing with her? Check in with her, see what you can see, what you
can find out. [Making the exploration experiential, looking to discover what
has shifted in the senses.]
PT: I think she feels more settled and more safe, more just knowing that I’m putting
her first and not just, you know, not my mom. I’m putting her first. [Another
affirmation and declaration]
TH: What tells how she is in your imagery?
PT: She just seems more relaxed.
TH: Do you get a picture of her body sense? What is it? [Deepening the new
experience]
PT: Yeah, like a body sense of just relaxation and sort of sitting under a tree or kind of
being in nature and like feeling that she can relax.
TH: Okay.
PT: Feeling that she can relax and let go and doesn’t need to be running things or be
in charge, yeah. [The younger one now has some action tendencies on
behalf of herself, letting go of strategies of control from her role reversal.]
TH: Let her know. Give her a sense and let her hear from the adult how you feel when
you hear she is ready to relax and wants to go be in nature and just let go and be
under a tree. What’s that like for you to see this? [In AEDP we stay with the

new experience for another round of relational metaprocessing, which
creates a spiral of transformation, in this case it deepens the channels of
communication between the adult self and the younger self.]
PT: I’m so happy she can release that burden of other people and know that she’s
supported and held by me, by other forces, and also other people are, too. [She
names her feeling for her younger self and for the corrective experience
of relinquishing her role reversal and feeling the support that she is
capable of giving to her younger self.]
In this vignette, Sylvia began the session with a new feeling of acceptance about
being confused and befriending her activation. She is in self-at-best here, as she
reports openness to her experience that allows for exploration of the pattern of
difficulty she has in setting boundaries. The work of setting the boundary with her
mother (in her imagination through the portrayal) was challenging at times. And yet,
with our dyadic regulation and my helping her to stay in her moment-to-moment
experience, she could feel her reactions, and she recalled what was evoked historically
with her mother. Then she could differentiate from the past and tune into her younger
self and respond to what she needed. Here, from her self-at-best she was able to
recognize the origin of her role reversal, while noticing and providing care and a
corrective message for her younger self. From here emerged relinquishing the role of
protector/caregiver. This session marked a significant shift in Sylvia’s feeling less
confused and helpless around her role of being protector and opened her capacity to
be more responsive and caring to the stirrings from her inner experience. In this
session, she accessed self and relational adaptive action, as well as the adaptive
action of categorical emotion.
Healing Disorganized Attachment
Embodying the role of a trustworthy other who is constant and collaborative is a high
bar for psychotherapists working with patients who manifest the disorganized
attachment pattern. And yet, to help our patients build trust in and understanding of
their own Self, alone and with an Other, to co-create a secure base and a safe haven
that can meet “fright without solution” and “attachment without solution,” our capacity
for showing up in relationship in a steady reliable fashion is crucial. It is what will
allow discovering the “solutions” to both fright and attachment. We have identified
common therapist reactivities to disorganization (as identified for each of the insecure
patterns) to help us recognize the predictable ways we as therapists might go off
track, and also the specific metaskills to allow us to get back on track. We do so to (a)
normalize this part of the process and (b) encourage therapists to reestablish
coordination and collaboration.
With disorganization, we aim to help patients face the struggles of their current life
by helping them to link and process their traumatic history, including how to be with
and collaborate with parts of themselves that have been heretofore dissociated,
untended and/or unformed.. When we are able to accompany our patients and hold

their compartmentalized parts and fragmented affects with care and compassion and
reflect our patients’ strengths and resilience, we can function as our patients’
prefrontal cortex, serving their mentalizing function until they are able to mentalize for
themselves. When patients can metaprocess the corrective experiences they have with
us, they may notice an increase in their felt sense of being real, worthy, and lovable
and an increased trust in their own capacity to know what they know and feel what
they feel. Thus, deepening integration, the felt experience of self-awareness helps
patients make sense of how they have come to be who they are, building their trust in
becoming who they want to become. Holding the work with a collaborative spirit is
essential in treating disorganized attachment.
Here are some of the main intervention pathways we showed in this chapter:
• Work within and at the edges of the patient’s window of tolerance
• Proceed by titrating emotion that emerges
• Therapist’s use of self, sensitivity, responsiveness, and building collaboration
• Tend to the missing attachment experiences
• Help the patient to develop epistemic trust
• Follow the channel of experience that opens
• Link the current-day experience with the historical past
• Check the intrarelational field (between parts of self)
• Unburden what the younger self has been holding
• Metaprocess the patient’s emotional expression on their own behalf
• Help the patient to build resources
• Recognize and relinquish the origins of role reversal